The White House
Office of the Press Secretary
The White House
Office of the Press Secretary
The White House
Office of the Press Secretary
Aboard Air Force One

	En Route Miami, Florida 
1:19 P.M. EST
MR. EARNEST:  I've got a quick topper, and then we'll get to your questions, okay?  The President is looking forward to this trip to south Florida, not just because of the weather forecast, but because of the opportunity it presents to engage members of the south Florida Latino community and Telemundo viewers across the country about immigration reform.
You will recall that just a week or two after the President took the oath of office in January 2013, the President once again laid out his core principles for common-sense immigration reform. These ideas were eventually incorporated into a compromise Senate proposal that earned the support of more than a dozen Republican senators, including one from the state of Florida.
They backed that bill not because it was perfect, but because it strengthens the U.S. economy, shrinks the deficit, ramped up security at our borders, and would ensure that we better lived up to our values as a nation of laws and a nation of immigrants. 
House Republicans blocked this compromise proposal for a year and a half.  So the President, drawing on well-established precedent, acted on his own to address some of the problems, using his executive authority.  His actions would, among other things, allow individuals who have been in the United States for a number of years to get a work permit after submitting to a background check and paying taxes. 
As you know, at least one district judge has sided with the administration about the legality of this action.  Another district judge has ruled against us, and the Department of Justice has filed an appeal. 
This town hall meeting today will give the President the opportunity to answer questions about the situation and signal his determination to continue to lead the fight for common-sense reforms that are good for our security and good for our economy.
So that's what we have to look forward to today.
Q    Josh, what’s the President’s thinking of what the status is of the DHS funding bill in Congress?  Is he confident that DHS will be funded given the position that Senator McConnell has taken?
MR. EARNEST:  Well, Jim, we're confident that the right thing to do is for Congress to fulfill their responsibility to ensure that the Department of Homeland Security has a budget that allows them to be funded through the end of the year.  That's seems like a pretty basic responsibility.  I think it does to most Americans and it certainly does to the President. 
We haven’t seen the Republicans thus far act with that level of common sense.  So, no, I don't think it is at all clear how this ends up.  But we are hopeful that common sense will prevail and that Republicans will put aside politics and vote to fund the Department of Homeland Security for the rest of the year.
Q    On Prime Minister Netanyahu’s visit -- the Prime Minister today said that world powers have “given up on stopping Iran from developing nuclear weapons.”  What is the White House reaction to that comment?
MR. EARNEST:  The whole point of the ongoing negotiations between Iran and the United States and our international partners is to resolve the international community’s concerns with the Iranian nuclear program and to secure an agreement that would ensure that Iran does not obtain a nuclear weapon.  That is the goal of those negotiations.  It is consistent with the President’s view about the best interests of American national security.  It's also consistent with the President’s view about the best interests of our closest ally in the region, Israel. 
I believe that our international partners have reached a similar conclusion, that it's in their interest that Iran does not obtain a nuclear weapon.  The Middle East is a rather volatile region of the world.  If Iran were to obtain a nuclear weapon, it would, in all likelihood, set off a nuclear arms race that would add even further instability to that region.
So the United States has worked closely with the international community to try to strike a diplomatic agreement to resolve these concerns so that Iran can prove to the international community that they are not developing a nuclear weapon.  And in return, Iran would allow to, step by step, rejoin the international community.  Right now, the Iranian economy has suffered pretty significantly from a sanctions regime that the United States has put in place, in careful coordination with our international partners. 
So that is the goal of these ongoing talks.  And the Prime Minister has articulated his concern and, in some cases, even opposition to those negotiations.  But the President continues to believe that those negotiations are the best way for us to ensure that Iran does not obtain a nuclear weapon.  If we can get Iran to not just state affirmatively that they are not developing a nuclear weapon, but also to agree to steps that would allow the international community to verify that they’re living up to the agreement, that is the best outcome.  And that is the best way to ease the international community’s concerns about Iran’s nuclear program.
And if the Prime Minister has an alternative about how those concerns can be more effectively resolved, then we’d certainly be interested in hearing his ideas for that.  But thus far, what we have pursued is what the President and our international partners believe is the best way to resolve these concerns.
Q    Is Netanyahu’s appearance before Congress destructive to Israeli-U.S. relations, as Susan Rice said?
MR. EARNEST:  Well, I think, to be precise, I believe what Susan was referring to is how reducing the U.S.-Israeli relationship to just a relationship between two political parties is destructive to a relationship between our two countries that for generations had been strengthened through bipartisan cooperation, not just in this country but in Israel.  The President himself has raised this concern.  The President has said that the relationship between the U.S. and Israel can't just be reduced to a relationship between the Republican Party and the Likud Party. 
The fact of the matter is, while we've had a Democratic President in the White House for the last six years, we have, by the admission of the Prime Minister from the Likud Party in Israel, had unprecedented security cooperation between our two countries.  That's consistent with the generations-long precedent of bipartisan support for our closest ally in the Middle East.
So what we hope is that we'll continue to see leadership in this country and in Israel that will not allow the relationship between our two countries to be dragged down by party politics. Party politics is fundamental to the political system in both of our countries, but for generations, both countries have succeeded in not allowing this critically important international relationship to get buffeted by those kinds of political arguments.  And the President believes that U.S. national security has been enhanced by protecting this relationship, and he believes that the interests of Israel are best served if we can protect this relationship from being subject to partisan politics.
Q    The President agrees with the National Security Advisor that by accepting the invitation Prime Minister Netanyahu has done something that has been destructive to the fabric of the U.S.-Israeli relationship?
MR. EARNEST:  Again, I think it is entirely consistent with what the President has already said, that the U.S.-Israel relationship has been strengthened because you have seen leaders in both parties in both countries signal their strong support for that relationship.  And allowing this relationship to be subjected to party politics does weaken the relationship.  It's not good for that relationship. 
And again, this is the reason that the President has said that he’s not going to meet with Prime Minister Netanyahu when he travels to Washington next week, is that it has the potential of leaving some voters in Israel even with the impression that the President might be interfering in that election.  And the President believes that we need to be rock-solid in our commitment to Israel’s security -- as we have been -- and that means not allowing it to be injected with party politics.
Q    If he does believe that, why not ask Prime Minister Netanyahu to call off his speech?  I mean, if he believes that his presence, his very presence here to give a speech two weeks before his election is destructive to the relationship, why not ask him to postpone it?
MR. EARNEST:  Prime Minister Netanyahu needs to make these decisions for himself.  He’s the Prime Minister of Israel.  He’s the person who should be setting his own schedule.  And he’s the one that has to make the decisions about what will be in his country’s best interest -- in the same way that the President of the United States has to make those kinds of decisions for his country.
So ultimately, the Prime Minister will set his own schedule. The President is also going to set his schedule.  The President believes that setting his schedule and not including a meeting with the Prime Minister on this trip is consistent with the best interests of American national security. 
Now, I'll also point out that when setting the President’s schedule, he’s concluded that spending time with the Israeli Prime Minister to make sure that we are closely coordinating and cooperating our efforts is in our best interests.  That's why the President has actually spent more time with Prime Minister Netanyahu than any other world leader. 
Again, but ultimately, this is a decision that Prime Minister Netanyahu will have to make for himself.  But I think what the National Security Advisor said about that decision is consistent with what the President has said about that decision.
Q    Do you know whether the President spoke with Ambassador Susan Rice before she made those comments in a broadcast interview and whether they talked -- whether she was authorized to say that?
MR. EARNEST:  Well, again, what she said was entirely consistent with what the President said publicly before.  I don't know whether or not the President had the opportunity to speak with her specifically about her Charlie Rose interview that she did yesterday.  I do know that she participated in at least some portion of the Amir of Qatar’s visit to the White House yesterday, so I know that she did see the President yesterday.  I don't know whether or not they talked about her interview.
Other questions?
Q    On the 529 college savings plan, the House is going to vote on those today.  We haven't seen a statement of administration policy on that, but the plan basically would expand the 529 program when the President originally wanted to restrict the program earlier.  If it does get to the President’s desk, is he going to sign it?  Does he have a policy position on that yet?
MR. EARNEST:  When it comes to education tax benefits, our highest priority should be to expand, improve and simplify tax benefits for the middle class.  The President’s nearly $50-billion investment in the middle class, which builds on bipartisan legislation and is fully offset, would cut taxes for 8.5 million students and families, and simplify taxes for every single student who relies on education tax credits to help pay for college.  The proposal before Congress would not achieve these goals, and instead focuses exclusively on education savings plans that are used by less than 3 percent of American families. 

	So while we do not oppose the House bill going forward, we do look forward to working with Congress on more ambitious, fiscally responsible education policies that would actually do more to improve college access and affordability, and promote opportunity for middle-class families.
Q    So it’s not a veto threat, but you -- you oppose parts of the bill, but not the actual bill moving forward?
MR. EARNEST:  Frankly, what we believe is -- we don’t oppose the House bill, but we believe that there is a whole lot more that we can do that would be a whole lot more effective and more fiscally responsible to ensure that we’re opening up a college education to even more middle-class families. 
Q    A question on the trip to Miami.  There were reports today that John Boehner and Mitch McConnell haven’t spoken in two weeks.  The President is here in Miami -- going to be here in Miami today and not in Washington.  Is there enough coordination and talking going on between the different parties and the party leaders to bring this to a resolution before the deadline?
MR. EARNEST:  The fact is the dispute -- the principle dispute right now appears to be between Republicans in Congress. There is a Republican majority in the House; there’s a Republican majority in the Senate.  There seems to be a majority in both houses for funding the Department of Homeland Security, so ultimately, it’s the responsibility of the House Speaker and the Senate Majority Leader to get together and figure it out.  So even if they haven’t spoken in the last couple of weeks, hopefully they’re going to speak today, because the deadline is on Friday.
Q    Any chance the President will -- when he gets back to Washington, will hold meetings with Republican leaders on this?
MR. EARNEST:  If we determine that it’s necessary for the President to do so, I’m confident that the President can make himself available to lead a meeting like that.  But like we’ve said, there is ample opportunity to use common sense, show some leadership, and actually fund the Department of Homeland Security.  There’s rarely a good time to be messing around with the funding for that department, but now seems like a particularly bad time to allow a political disagreement to prevent the men and women who are protecting our borders from getting paid.
Q    Josh, a couple of questions about Cuba.  Over the weekend, a couple hundred dissidents were arrested as part of public demonstrations.  How concerned is the administration about this, and what has your response been to it?
MR. EARNEST:  We continue to be concerned about the Cuban government’s treatment of their own people.  For generations, we’ve seen the Cuban government not just neglect but, in some cases, even trample the basic human rights of their people, and that includes a tendency to round up political protestors, or at least people who have different political views than their government.
So we have made clear our concerns about this on a number of previous occasions.  Ultimately, our strategy for engaging the Cuban people is to move to reestablish diplomatic ties between our two countries, to try to open up some more commerce between our two countries in a way that would essentially further empower the Cuban people.  And we also believe it will be effective in removing what has been an obstacle to our efforts to try to build greater international consensus around the need to pressure the Cuban government.  And too often, the U.S. policy of trying to isolate Cuba has interfered with our ability to get people to focus on Cuban policies that trample the basic human rights of their people.
So we’re confident that we’ve taken the right steps to try to bring about the kind of change that we’d like to see in Cuba. And that change is something that should be driven by the Cuban people, and they should have a government that reflects their will and their ambitions. 
Q    How much of a political problem is this for the President as he’s trying to sell his Cuba policy?  Back when he announced it, 50 political prisoners were released; now, 200 have been rounded up.  I mean, how much does that undercut the President’s argument that -- his attempts to sell this policy to audiences like the Cuban Americans who will be listening to him in Miami today?
MR. EARNEST:  I think what’s important here is some historical context -- that for 50 years there had been a firm embargo and a refusal to establish diplomatic ties with Cuba.  That policy allowed the Cuban government to essentially, with impunity, continue to trample on the basic human rights of their people.  The President believed that it’s time for a new strategy. 
And that’s why, at the end of last year, he announced some policy changes that reflects that new strategy.  And the President was clear in his very first statement on this that we did not anticipate that this would solve every problem overnight, but what we do anticipate is that over time, by redoubling our efforts to engage the Cuban government and the Cuban people, that we can empower the Cuban people to speak with a greater voice and to ultimately have the kind of political leadership that reflects their will and their ambition.
Q    Josh, on the immigration executive action, I believe a court yesterday rejected the administration’s request to rule on the stay request by the end of this week.  So is the Justice Department going to do more?  Are they going to appeal to a higher court?  Or what’s the next step to try to get this stay so that you can actually move forward with the parts of the directive that are affected by the ruling?
MR. EARNEST:  You’re right, we did see a ruling -- or at least an order from Judge Hanen that asked the plaintiffs in the case -- essentially the consortium of states that have come together in protest over these executive actions -- to file their response to our stay by early next week.  The administration had previously said that we wanted the judge to rule on our application for a stay by today. 
So I think this is an indication the judge doesn’t intend to meet that deadline, but does want to hear from the plaintiffs by early next week.  And we continue to be confident in the legal arguments that we’re making in this case. 
There is a clear, established precedent for the President taking these executive actions.  And again, the executive actions that the President has put in place are actions that would actually bring accountability to our broken immigration system.  It would bring millions of people who have been in the United States for a number of years out of the shadows.  It would submit them to a background check.  It would make them pay taxes.  And it would ensure that we can focus our limited law enforcement resources on those who’ve only recently crossed the border and on those who may pose a threat to national security or to the communities that they’re living in.
So this is a pretty common-sense decision.  It’s one that’s rooted in well-established legal precedent.  And that’s why we’re going to continue to aggressively make our case in the courts.
Q    Given that, is there any thought to moving forward with the part of the directive that’s not affected by the ruling with the new -- with parents of U.S. citizens?  Given that that wasn’t supposed to start -- that the applications weren’t supposed to start until May, couldn’t you start moving forward with that sooner?
MR. EARNEST:  Well, there are two elements of this.  One aspect of the ruling is something I alluded to in my previous answer, which is the judge’s ruling that went against the administration does not affect the ability of homeland security officials to use prosecutorial discretion, which means that they can focus their law enforcement resources on felons and not on families; that they can make sure that they’re focusing on people who have only recently entered the country and on people who may pose a threat to public safety. 
Those efforts are ongoing.  Those efforts continue.  So those efforts are not affected by the judge’s ruling.  What is affected by the judge’s ruling are the administrative steps that would allow us to essentially issue work permits to those individuals that have agreed to come out of the shadows, that have agreed to submit to a background check, and that have agreed to pay taxes.  And that is, in the President’s view, establishing some accountability.
Now, it’s also, in the view of some law enforcement officials across the country, including some law enforcement officials from Texas, consistent with the kinds of steps that would protect public safety.  Because if people are coming out of the shadows and submitting themselves to a background check, if they don’t pass the background check then they can be detained and deported.
So there is an opportunity for us to step up our enforcement as well in the context of these basic executive actions.  So there are any number of reasons why we believe that we should be able to move forward with these administrative actions.  And that does mean that those actions that we can implement, we’re going to.  But the Department of Homeland Security has said that they will not implement the work permit process until some of these legal questions have been resolved.
Q    Has any infrastructure been put in place to process all of these cases?  I mean, there are complaints that there aren’t enough judges to handle backlogged cases, people who have been applying for citizenship and green cards for a long time.  Is there enough, or is there a move to -- I don't know -- bolster the system?
MR. EARNEST:  For the specific process, I’d refer you to the Department of Homeland Security.  The process that people would go through, to be clear, would not be getting a green card.  It would be a separate process.  So a green card would confer them with some legality, and this is actually deferred enforcement.  So they’re separate processes. 
I know that the Department of Homeland Security, since the President announced these executive actions back in November, has been taking the necessary administrative steps to be prepared to begin accepting those applications.  They have not started accepting those applications because of this recent legal ruling. But we’re hopeful that we can resolve these legal questions and, again, move forward with implementing the President’s executive actions.
Anybody else? 
Q    Back to Julie’s question.  Does this mean because the district court judge, in essence, delayed and asked for plaintiffs to respond -- will you be kicking it to the Fifth Circuit then for an emergency stay right away, or do you wait for this district court process to unfold?
MR. EARNEST:  At this point, we’re going to continue to see it through at the district court level.  Now, I don’t want people to be confused.  That’s under the question of a stay.  There is a question about our appeal of the merits of the case, and that is something that we have appealed to the Fifth Circuit, and that is a process that’s moving forward. 
Q    There are going to be some young immigration advocates at this town hall that are going to want the President to do more executive actions.  Does the lawsuit and the DHS standoff, does that sort of stand in the way of the President doing more on immigration?  Is he deterred from wanting to do any other executive actions?
MR. EARNEST:  Well, the President, when he made this announcement in November, did indicate that he was using every tool at his disposal, all of the authority that he has to try to address some of the problems of our broken immigration system.  So I think the President will make the case that he has acted using all of his authority to try to solve as many of these problems as he can. 
He’s also going to reiterate his commitment to try to work with Congress to advance legislation.  The truth is there’s a lot more that could be done with legislation that would be good for the country.  And the President stands ready to work with Democrats and Republicans to try to make that legislation a reality.
As I mentioned at the beginning, there were fruitful talks that were convened between Democrats and Republicans on the Hill with the support of the administration to reach a bipartisan, common-sense proposal, a proposal that passed the Senate with the bipartisan support of both senators from Florida.  Unfortunately it was blocked by House Republicans.  So because we’re now in a new Congress we have to start that process over.  The President stands ready to do that.  We just haven’t seen a lot of interest from Republicans, unfortunately.
Q    Josh, there was a report out of Miami that the White House invited Congressman Curbelo to attend the town hall meeting and that he asked for a ride on Air Force One to get up there and was denied.  Can you talk about that?
MR. EARNEST:  Well, as a standard practice when we travel to -- when the President travels outside of Washington, it's not uncommon at all for us to invite a member of Congress from the congressional district where the President is appearing.  And we do that, whether or not it's a Democrat or a Republican who’s participating -- or who represents that district in Congress. 
What’s also true is that over the course of the last several months, we have made more of an effort to try to invite members of Congress from both parties to ride on Air Force One.  And there have been some high-profile members of Congress, both Democrats and Republicans, who’ve joined the White House for trips.  In this case, we were unable to accommodate the Congressman’s request, but we typically try to do so when we can.
Q    When you say “unable to accommodate,” was it a space issue?
MR. EARNEST:  I'm not sure exactly of the issue. 
Anybody else?  Okay.  Thanks, everybody.
END

	1:44 P.M. EST
The White House
Office of the Press Secretary
The White House
Office of the Press Secretary
James S. Brady Press Briefing Room
1:04 P.M. EST
MR. EARNEST:  Good afternoon, everybody.  Sorry for the brief delay in getting started today.  Let me just mention one thing that I think many of you are already aware of.  But today, the President has selected Mr. Joseph Clancy to serve as the permanent director of the United States Secret Service.  Director Clancy, who is a 27-year veteran of the agency and a former Special Agent in Charge of the Presidential Protective Division, has served as the Acting Director since October 1st of last year. 
Many of you will recall that Director Clancy stepped into that roll at the special request of the President at a rather difficult time for the agency.  And over the course of the last several months, Director Clancy has demonstrated the kind of leadership that, frankly, many of us expected him to demonstrate.  He is somebody that has, based on his long track record with the agency, a lot of credibility built up inside the agency, and he used that credibility to put in place reforms that were recommended by this outside panel that DHS Secretary Jeh Johnson had convened.
So he’s got a lot of important work still ahead of him, but we’re certainly pleased to see that his leadership thus far has been recognized with this permanent appointment.
So with that, Jim, do you want to get us started on questions?  And I do have a pretty hard out at 2:00 p.m.  So if you can help me stay on time, I would appreciate that.  Thank you.
Q    On your announcement, Josh -- when the outside group that reviewed and made recommendations for the Secret Service recommended fairly strongly that the White House hire outside, or this administration hire an outsider for this job.  In fact, it stated that, “Only a director from outside the Secret Service, removed from organizational traditions and personal relationships, will be able to do the honest top-to-bottom reassessment this will require.”  Why did the President stick with Mr. Clancy?
MR. EARNEST:  Well, Jim, I’d point out a couple things about this.  The first is, anytime you’re making a personnel decision like this, you’re going to weigh somebody’s personal attachments inside the agency with their ability to take a cold-eyed assessment of what actually needs to be changed in that agency so that they can live up to the high standards that they have set for themselves.
And Mr. Clancy, over the last several months, has demonstrated that he was willing to conduct a candid, clear-eyed assessment of the shortcomings of that agency and to look at needed reforms and implement them.  And that precisely is why he has been promoted to this permanent role.
His willingness to use his credibility within the agency to implement these reforms in some ways is the best of both worlds.  That’s not just the assessment of the President, that’s actually also the assessment of at least one member of this outside panel.  Tom Perrelli, who you’ll recall was a senior Justice Department official earlier in the administration, said that “Acting Director Clancy is a dedicated public servant who’s made important changes since he began the job, and has started the process of reforming the Service.  I look forward to working with him as he continues to implement the panel’s recommendations.”
So I think that’s a pretty clear indication that at least one member of the panel, who has spent a lot of time thinking about what kinds of changes are needed at the agency, recognized that Mr. Clancy was the right person for the job because he had the kind of credibility within the organization to implement successfully the kinds of changes that at least this outside panel believes are necessary.
Q    Did the President consider other candidates, or was Mr. Clancy, once he became Acting Director, essentially going through a job review to see if he could carry out and become permanent? 
MR. EARNEST:  Well, I don’t want to get into sort of the inner workings of this personnel process, but I can tell you that it was not at all a foregone conclusion that when Mr. Clancy was given the acting position, that he would necessarily be asked to stay on as the permanent director.  But certainly his solid performance over the last several months in implementing needed changes at the agency I think certainly served him well as he was considered for that position.
Q    On another subject.  Is the administration limiting the amount of information that it’s giving to Israel regarding the Iran nuclear talks?
MR. EARNEST:  Well, Jim, I’ve certainly seen some reports to that effect, and I know that there were some initial reports that indicated that the United States was no longer communicating with our allies in Israel about the ongoing negotiations with Iran.  That obviously is false.  There are any number of meetings that have taken place in recent weeks and are scheduled for the weeks ahead that indicate the continued close communication and coordination between U.S. national security officials and their Israeli counterparts.
For example, I can tell you that Phil Gordon, who’s the White House Coordinator for the Middle East at the National Security Council, met on Monday with Israel’s Minister of Intelligence.  The focus of that discussion was principally on the Iran negotiations.  I can tell you that the National Security Advisor, Susan Rice, here at the White House, maintains regular contact with her Israeli counterpart, Yossi Cohen.  And in fact, I understand that Mr. Cohen is actually expected to be at the White House later this week for consultations with Dr. Rice. 
I can tell you that the Under Secretary of State, Wendy Sherman, who is the sort of principal negotiator for the United States in these talks with the P5+1 in Iran, has repeatedly met with the Israeli National Security Advisor as well as the Israeli Minister of Intelligence on a number of occasions.  And those kinds of consultations are going to continue. 
At the same time, we’ve also been very clear about the fact that the United States is not going to be in a position of negotiating this agreement in public, and particularly when we see that there is a continued practice of cherry picking specific pieces of information and using them out of context to distort the negotiating position of the United States.  So there is an obligation when you’re participating in these kinds of negotiations to ensure that those consultations and that those negotiations are carried out in good faith.  And that means giving negotiators the room and the space to negotiate.
But at the same time, I can tell you that there’s -- that at least based on one assessment that I’ve heard -- there’s probably, I would acknowledge, not a real precise way to quantify this, but I think you could arguably make the case that there’s no country that is not participating in the negotiations that has greater insight into what’s going on at that negotiating table.  And it's not a coincidence. 
You could also make a pretty strong case that there is no nation who is not represented in those negotiations who has a clearer stake in the outcome of these negotiations.  And that’s principally why -- I guess not principally why, but it's an important reason why the President has pursued this diplomatic opening.  The principal reason is because he believes it's clearly in the national security interest of the United States of America for Iran not to obtain a nuclear weapon.  And the most effective way for us to do that is to get the Iranian regime to voluntarily, and in a verifiable way, give up their pursuit of a nuclear weapon and make it clear that they’re not going to obtain a nuclear weapon, and put in place a monitoring regime to ensure that they don’t acquire one.
And that is the goal of these negotiations.  The United States has a clear stake in this outcome, but so does Israel, and that’s why we’re going to continue to consult with them about these talks.
Q    So you are consulting, but you are worried about cherry picking?  So does that still limit the information that you provide during those consultations?
MR. EARNEST:  Well, Jim, I obviously am not going to be able to get into the details of those conversations, I think for obvious reasons, but I think it is fair to say that the United States is mindful of the need to not negotiate in public and ensure that information that’s discussed at the negotiating table is not taken out of context and publicized in a way that distorts a negotiating position of the United States and our allies.  
Q    And you think that distortion and cherry picking has occurred -- has been done by the Israelis?
MR. EARNEST:  Well, there’s no question that some of the things that the Israelis have said in characterizing our negotiating position have not been accurate.  There’s no question about that. 
Q    Quick question on the immigration lawsuit.  How does that decision by Judge Hanen affect the DHS funding debate in the White House’s mind?
MR. EARNEST:  In our mind, all along we have made clear that the Republican leadership in the United States Congress has a responsibility to ensure that the Department of Homeland Security is properly funded.  You’ve heard me say on a couple of occasions it’s hard to imagine that there is a good time to muck around in the funding of the Department of Homeland Security, but now seems like a particularly bad time to do it.
And the other thing that I’ll point out is that Senator McConnell himself indicated at the end of last year and at the beginning of this year that Republicans finally had an opportunity to demonstrate that they could be what he described as a responsible right-of-center governing majority.  It is completely irresponsible to allow a political dispute to interfere with the ability of the United States Congress to fund the Department of Homeland Security. 
And it certainly is not going to be good for the ongoing efforts to protect the American people.  And it certainly isn’t fair to the hundreds of thousands of Department of Homeland Security employees who a couple weeks from now may be facing the prospect of going to work to keep the country safe but not getting a paycheck for it.  That doesn’t seem fair and it certainly isn’t in the best interest of the United States of America.
Q    So in terms of this lawsuit, I mean, first of all, will the administration seek an immediate emergency stay of that decision?
MR. EARNEST:  Well, our legal strategy going forward is something that’s going to be determined by the Department of Justice.  And they’ve indicated that in the next couple of days they’ll have more information about how we will pursue that strategy.  But that strategy will certainly include an appeal of this ruling because we don’t believe that it’s a fair, accurate reading of the law.
Q    But you could proceed with an appeal and the injunction would remain in place so that you wouldn’t be able to implement the program.  So why not wait until the whole process is completed before you --
MR. EARNEST:  The questions that you’re raising are exactly the kinds of questions that the attorneys at the Department of Justice are considering right now.  And within the next couple of days, I would anticipate that we’ll have some more information about the way forward here
Jeff.
Q    Josh, the President said yesterday that DHS will still be preparing to implement this program because he believes that the administration will prevail in court. 
MR. EARNEST:  That’s correct.
Q    What is the White House’s assessment of how long this is going to take?
MR. EARNEST:  Well, this is another question for the attorneys at the Department of Justice to evaluate, is what is the strategy that we can pursue that will resolve this legal process as soon as possible because we’re confident that when this is resolved in the legal system that the position of the government, the position of the administration will prevail.
That’s because the steps that the President announced at the end of last year are entirely consistent with the kinds of steps that previous Presidents have taken -- previous Presidents of both parties I might add.  So we're confident that there is a solid precedent here, there is a solid legal foundation for the actions that the President announced.  More importantly, we're confident that the actions the President announced are the right thing for the country.
Q    But for the millions of people who were getting ready to apply and are now sort of in limbo, there’s no way of telling them how long that's going to last?
MR. EARNEST:  Well, we certainly would hope that we can move as quickly as we can through the legal system so that that situation can be resolved and that we can move forward with implementing a set of decisions that are, again, clearly consistent with the law and clearly in the best interest of the United States.
Q    Two other topics.  Do you have any reaction to the foreign policy team that was announced by Jeb Bush and his campaign today?
MR. EARNEST:  I don't.
Q    You sure? 
Q    I was hoping you would.  (Laughter.)
Q    Lastly, what does the White House make of what’s going on in Argentina?  A prosecutor has died who was bringing up some issues against the President.  The opponents are charging that the government is interfering with the judiciary.  And now Argentina has reached out to the United States, asking them -- asking Washington to bring up claims up about Iran and killings there in its negotiations.  What’s your take on what’s going on?
MR. EARNEST:  Well, Jeff, I think just as a topline matter, I can convey to you that obviously the nation of Argentina is a significant economy and a significant player in our sort of relations throughout the Americas.  The President has on a number of occasions, or at least on a couple of previous occasions had the opportunity to meet with the leader of Argentina because there are deep ties between our countries.
We certainly are concerned any time that in a country like Argentina, with whom we have a strong relationship, where questions are raised about the rule of law and of justice.  So I don't have anything specific to say about sort of where things stand in that process, or whether or not there is an appropriate role for the U.S. government to play in all of that.  But it is certainly something that we continue to monitor closely.  And it’s a reflection of the way in which we value the relationship between the United States and Argentina.
Q    Is it hurting your relationship?
MR. EARNEST:  Well, there’s somebody who may be a better or more close observer of U.S.-Argentina relations who could answer that question.  At this point, this continues to be a situation that we're going to monitor.
Let’s move around.  April.
Q    Josh, a couple of questions.  Back on the Secret Service, now that you've named Joe Clancy as the head -- the permanent head, could you talk to us about what has transpired since the firing of the former head of the Secret Service and the firings of the top tiers of a lot of the people in the Secret Service?  Can you talk to us about that?
MR. EARNEST:  Well, I could tell you that you named some of the specific reforms that Director Clancy has implemented since taking over the leadership of that agency.  And again, this all occurred within the last few months. 
Since taking office as the Acting Director, Mr. Clancy has conducted a comprehensive, top-to-bottom assessment to determine the root cause behind the recent shortcomings in the agency.  He’s directed all personnel who -- all Secret Service personnel who operate on the White House grounds to undergo additional classroom and practical training.  He’s sought additional funding for training and equipment for Secret Service personnel.  And as you mentioned, he swiftly implemented some of the personnel changes that were recommended by the blue-ribbon panel.
Q    Can you quantify the number of firings that happened?  Because I’m hearing that there was quite few.
MR. EARNEST:  I don't have the specific numbers in front of me, but you can certainly check with the Secret Service, and they may be able to give you some more information about that. 
But this is consistent with what Director Clancy has also done in terms of trying to engage more deeply with rank-and-file officers throughout the agency.  After all, we're talking about men and women who on a regular basis are willing to put their lives on the line to protect the President and the First Family, to protect the White House grounds, and to protect all of us who work here on a daily basis.  So we certainly are appreciative of their service. 
And what that agency has done is set a very high standard of service and professionalism.  And there have been some instances where they’ve fallen short, even by their own acknowledgement.  And Director Clancy has to do the very important work of ensuring that that agency, and the men and women who serve in that agency, live up to that very high standard.  And certainly those of us who have had an opportunity to watch Director Clancy as he’s done his job understand that he holds himself to a very high standard of professionalism, and we certainly would anticipate that his style of leadership will have a positive effect on the agency, and that he will continue to implement the reforms that are needed to ensure that they live up to that high standard.
Q    Can I ask you on another issue?  On immigration reform, since the judge’s ruling in Texas, we understand that immigration is not just about one group of people in this country, it’s about different groups of people in this country.  How does this ruling affect particularly African and Caribbean immigrants coming into this country?  Because the NAACP and many other organizations worked with many Hispanic organizations to help push through immigration reform; they said they had a stake.  So what does this do for African and Caribbean immigrants as well?
MR. EARNEST:  Well, I guess there are a couple of things about this most recent court ruling, April, that are important for people to keep in mind.  The first is that it does not apply to the action that the President took back in 2012 to grant some relief to DREAMers.  These are immigrants of this country who came to this country as children; they were raised essentially as Americans -- American in every way except their papers.  And the ruling does not apply to that exercise of executive action.
The ruling also does not apply to the direction that our law enforcement officers have received from the Secretary of Homeland Security about prosecutorial discretion.  And this is something that the President feels strongly about, that it’s important that the agency use their limited resources to focus on those who pose the most prominent threat to communities across the country. 
This means that law enforcement officials at the Department of Homeland Security, and particularly as it relates to the agencies that handle immigration, that they’re focused on people who might pose a threat to national security, people who are involved in conducting -- or people who have been involved in criminal activity.  Essentially, that the actions of those law enforcement agencies should be focused on felons, not on families.  And that is something that will remain in place even after this most recent court ruling.
But I think some of the questions and issues that you’re raising, April, can be best addressed by Congress actually taking the kind of legislative action that’s long overdue, and that’s legislative action that would bring about common-sense, bipartisan reform to our broken immigration system.  And that means not just dealing with the millions of people who currently live in the shadows, but also putting in place some much needed reforms of our legal immigration system.  And that is why, even though the President has taken these executive actions that will have a positive impact on the immigration system, will have a positive impact on our economy, that we’re going to continue to call on Congress to take the steps that only they can take to address some of these problems.
Q    In the ACA, you got 11.4 million people.  But in that number, did you get the minority groups that you wanted to focus it on?  This White House made a really strong push for African Americans and for Hispanics.  Did you get those numbers that you were looking for in this latest enrollment period?
MR. EARNEST:  Well, April, the more granular detail about the numbers included in this latest enrollment period will be available later from HHS.  I don’t believe that they’ve crunched the numbers in that way.  But I can tell you that in the last enrollment period we did have some success in driving down the uninsured rate in the African American and Latino community, much as we did among people all across the country.
I can tell you that one of the most important steps that we could see states take that would have an impact on these numbers would be for the remaining states that have blocked Medicaid expansion to follow through and actually expand Medicaid to cover a whole lot more people -- not just African Americans and Latinos, but Americans of all races.  And it certainly would have a very positive impact in trying to drive down the uninsured rate in this country.
Q    -- quantify the number, you said (inaudible) number?
MR. EARNEST:  Yes, that they reduced the uninsured rate in the last enrollment period by 6.8 percent in the African American community, and 7.7 percent in the Latino community.  And when we have updated numbers, we’ll release them.
Kristen.
Q    Josh, thanks.  I want to ask you about the ISIS beheadings in Libya.  What is the administration’s reaction?  And to what extent are you concerned about ISIS in Libya?  Where does this fit into the broader fight against ISIS?
MR. EARNEST:  Well, Kristen, there was a statement that we put out from the President over the weekend, responding to this situation.  I can tell you that, in general, that we strongly support the efforts of the United Nations and the Special Representative to the Secretary General to facilitate formation of a national unity government and bring a political solution to the ongoing political security and institutional crisis in that country.
What we have seen, Kristen, is that we have seen extremists try to capitalize on instability in a country to carry out acts of violence.   And that is why we continue to be concerned about the situation in Libya, and it’s also why we believe that the best way to get the situation in Libya under control is to try to stabilize a representative central government in Libya.  And there’s a special representative from the United Nations that’s working on that task right now, and we are strongly supportive of his efforts.
Q    And have you been in contact with -- have top officials here been in contact with their counterparts in Egypt?  And is there any discussion about sending aid, support -- military support?
MR. EARNEST:  Well, I don’t have any conversations specifically to read out.  The President was pretty forceful in condemning those killings, not just over the weekend, but also including in the op-ed that was published in the L.A. Times today.  So we certainly have an important military-to-military relationship with the Egyptian government.  They play an important role in some of our counterterrorism activities in that region of the world.  But in terms of any specific conversations or any specific requests have been made, I don’t have any information about that.
Q    And you bring up the President’s op-ed.  One of the criticisms of this summit is that it is dealing with the root causes of violent extremism.  Does it need to deal with the situation on the ground more, and actually the strategy of the United States and its Western partners and Arab partners?
MR. EARNEST:  Well, it’s a good question, Kristen.  The summit that we’ve convened over the course of this week is not a summit to discuss our comprehensive strategy to eradicate extremists who pose harm to the United States.  We do have a strategy for that, and one component of that strategy is ensuring that we are countering violent extremism; that we want to mitigate the ability of extremists to capitalize on social media to try to recruit others to their cause. 
But there are other critically important elements of our strategy, not the least of which is the military strategy that this President has led.  The best example of that is the success we’ve had in wiping extremist terrorist leaders off the battlefield in every place from Pakistan to Yemen to Somalia, to even Iraq and Syria.  So there is a military strategy. 
A couple of months ago I invited David Cohen, the Under Secretary of the Treasury -- or the Assistant Secretary of the Treasury -- I think I just gave him a promotion -- to come and talk about our efforts to counter financing of terrorist organizations, including ISIL, and that we’ve seen that being able to shut off their financing is a critical way that we can reduce their ability to fund their ongoing efforts.
Q    But are there any tangibles that can come out of this summit, Josh?  Or is this more of a meeting of the minds and to discuss different ideas?
MR. EARNEST:  Well, I guess the way that you phrased your question, that those two things aren’t mutually exclusive.  I think there will be a number of things that are important about this summit.  I think the thing that I find most interesting is that there are already, in local communities across this country, coordinated efforts to counter extremist messaging that’s aimed at vulnerable youth in communities across this country.
So we’re going to hear in the context of this summit from law enforcement, political and community leaders, from Boston, Minneapolis and Los Angeles.  These are three communities that have devoted significant time and effort to trying to counter that radical messaging in communities in their cities.  And to the extent that they can talk about some of the success that they’ve had and to the extent that local leaders in other communities can apply those lessons in those communities -- I think those are real, tangible results and real, tangible ideas that other leaders can employ to make sure that they’re protecting people in their communities.
Q    And quickly on DHS.  It seems like a likely resolution to the funding problem is a short-term extension of DHS funding.  Would the President sign that?
MR. EARNEST:  Well, I’m not sure that anybody knows exactly what the outcome of this situation is going to be.  I mean, we just saw the Speaker of the House go on television over the weekend and declare that he was certainly comfortable with not funding the Department of Homeland Security.  I’m not sure what kind of analysis leads you to that conclusion.  It’s certainly not in the best interest of the country and I’m not sure that it’s really in the best interest of anybody’s political calculation, at least one that I can see.  But, yet, he said it nonetheless, and I think that does raise some questions about whether or not this new governing Republican majority in Congress is committed to actually being responsible and acting in the best interest of the American people.
One of the things that Senator McConnell said at the end of last year was that one of his goals was to make sure that Republican leadership didn’t appear scary to the American people.  And when I saw that, I came out here and had a little fun with that, that he was setting the bar really low.  It looks like right now congressional Republicans are prepared to wiggle underneath that bar.
Q    But what if it emerges as a short-term extension, would the President sign it?
MR. EARNEST:  Well, we’re going to see what emerges out of this process.  What clearly should emerge is a clear plan from congressional Republicans to fund the Department of Homeland Security before the impending deadline.
Jon.
Q    Josh, let me pick up right there.  If they don’t get an agreement on funding for Department of Homeland Security and there’s a partial shutdown of the department, will this be a national security risk?  In other words, will American be less safe if Congress cannot come up with an agreement to fund the department?
MR. EARNEST:  Well, the Department of Homeland Security has put out some specific information about the impact that this would have on their operation, so I’d refer you to them to talk about it.  But let me just say, I don’t think that there is anybody who would be comfortable with making the case that refusing to pay our men and women on the frontlines of Homeland Security actually enhances our national security.
Q    Yes, and the reason why I asked the question is because obviously I’ve looked at the information the department has put out, and they’ve got a large number of essential employees, that most of them will actually still be going to work.  So I’m just trying to gauge how big a threat, or is it a threat, to the safety of Americans if this funding agreement is not reached.
MR. EARNEST:  Well, again, I don’t think there’s anybody who can stand here and make the case that it would be good for our national security.  I certainly don’t think it would be good for our national security.
Q    But will you make the case that it’s bad for our national security, that there’s a risk here that we could -- a greater risk of a terrorist attack?  Or not protecting --
MR. EARNEST:  Well, I would leave it to the Department of Homeland Security to sort of offer up a specific assessment about the impact that this would have.  I don’t think there’s anybody who could make the case that it would be good, and I don’t think there’s anybody who could make the case that it would be fair. 
The President gave a State of the Union speech that was focused on middle-class economics.  And he talked about a wide range of things that we can do to strengthen the middle class in this country.  And the fact of the matter is, people who are working for the Transportation Security Administration and trying to safeguard our airports, those are good middle-class jobs.  Those are also American patriots.  And I'm surprised that we would have congressional Republicans who are suggesting that they should go ahead and go to work and do it without getting a paycheck. 
Q    So can I get you to respond to what the Speaker of the House said on this?  He makes the case that the House has passed a bill to fund the Department of Homeland Security; that that bill is now before the Senate, that it is Senate Democrats that are filibustering that bill.  Would you respond to that?  And would you encourage the Senate Democrats to drop their filibuster so that the bill can be passed, and then you can have negotiations the old-fashioned way -- how a bill becomes a law? I mean, in fact, the Speaker said this probably 10 times in that interview, that the House has passed a bill to fund the Department of Homeland Security.
MR. EARNEST:  Well, they passed a bill that won’t pass the Senate.  And so --
Q    Because Democrats are filibustering it.
MR. EARNEST:  Well, because Democrats don’t support a piece of legislation that would actually undo the kinds of administrative reforms that the President has put in place to solve our broken immigration system.  So here’s the thing:  If Republicans want to have a negotiation about trying to fix our broken immigration system, we would welcome the opportunity to have that negotiation.  We’ve wanted to talk to them about immigration reform for, literally, for years.  We had a good conversation about that with Democrats and Republicans of the United States Senate.  We actually got a bipartisan piece of legislation that congressional Republicans blocked for more than a year and a half.
So, again, I'm not really sure exactly what the Speaker’s point is.  I would assume that his point would be that he understands the responsibility that he has for making sure the Department of Homeland Security is funded.  And we’re hopeful that he’ll get that done before the deadline.  
Q    Okay.  And one other very different topic.  I wanted ask you about a report in the Wall Street Journal that the President has received communications back from the Ayatollah in Iran -- two letters back, one in 2009, and another just in the past few weeks.  Can you confirm that? 
MR. EARNEST:  John, I'm going to decline to get into any sort of specifics about conversations that the President may have had -- or communications the President may have had with the leaders of the Iranian regime.
We’ve been very clear about what our priority is there.  And our top priority is resolving the international community’s concerns with their nuclear program.  But there’s a long list of other concerns that the United States has with the way that the Iranian regime has supported terrorism around the globe; the way that they continue to promote anti-Semitism and even to wish ill on our allies in Israel.  So there’s a long list of concerns that we have with the Iranian regime, but the conversations that we’re having right now about trying to resolve the international community’s concerns about their nuclear program, right now is what we’re focused on.
Let me just also say one thing.  We’re also concerned about the status of a handful of Americans that are currently being detained in Iran wrongly and against their will.  And we’re continuing to work for the release of those Americans as well. 
I'm sorry, Jon, go ahead.
Q    But, Josh, the President himself has acknowledged in the past that he has written to Ayatollah Khamenei.  So all I'm asking you is if you can confirm whether or not the Ayatollah has responded back to the President.  I'm not asking you to give me details on that letter.  Can you at least confirm that the President is in receipt of a letter or letters in response to what we know that the President has written?
MR. EARNEST:  I'm not in a position to do that from here, but let me see if I can get you some more information on this. 
Q    And then, to follow up on that, eventually -- I understand you’re in the middle of negotiations, you want to keep this correspondence confidential -- but will you commit to eventually releasing those letters?  Obviously, it’s of great interest whether or not the leader -- the real leader of Iran, somebody who considers the United States the “great Satan,” whether or not there’s been a letter chain back and forth with the President.  Will you commit to eventually releasing those to the public?
MR. EARNEST:  Well, at this point I’m not willing to commit that those letters exist.  But let me see if we can do a little work and get you some more details on this.
Angela.
Q    Thanks, Josh.  The Summit on Violent Extremism is going on right next door.  And the President and the Vice President yesterday have gone to great lengths to not say that it’s a summit about Islamic extremism.  They say it’s broader than that.  But if you look at the groups that are participating, most of them -- most of the community groups are related in one way or another to the Muslim community.  How do you square the message with the participants?
MR. EARNEST:  Well, Angela, I think what I would say is that we're very mindful of the fact that a particularly virulent strain of extremist ideology has tried to insert itself in the Muslim community.  There’s no question about that.  That's true in the United States; that's true in other places around the world.  And that will be the subject of extensive discussion at the summit.
At the same time, we also recognize that there are other forms of extremism that have prompted others to carry acts of violence even on American soil.  We’ve talked on a couple of previous occasions about the violent extremist who carried out an attack on a Sikh temple in Wisconsin; or the radical ideology that prompted someone to go and open fire outside a Jewish community center in Kansas. 
So there are -- extremism has taken a variety of forms in this country in a way that has had violent results.  And we want to be focused on making sure that we're countering all of that.  But that does not diminish in any way the concern that we have that some extremists have made some inroads into some Muslim communities in attempting to inspire them to carry out acts of violence or to join their fight.  And we have worked very hard and very diligently with the Muslim community here in this country, with local law enforcement, and with political leaders to counter that ideology and to counter that messaging.  And that is something about which we remain vigilant. 
And today’s summit, or this week’s summit provides a good venue for talking about some of the successes of that strategy and to identify some of the additional steps that we can take to further safeguard the American people.
Q    Are there any groups you can point to that are there participating in the summit that are targeted at other groups?
MR. EARNEST:  I'd refer you to the National Security Council.  They will be able to provide you some more information about other individuals who are participating in the summit.
Q    Does the United States support the Egyptian request that the international coalition airstrikes should include Libya too?
MR. EARNEST:  Well, what I can tell you is that right now what we have said is that we are supportive of the ongoing efforts of the U.N. Special Representative and his efforts to try to facilitate the formation of a national unity government, that we believe that that is sort of the next appropriate step here.  But we are certainly mindful of the fact that there are extremists that are trying to establish or at least capitalize on the instability in Libya to carry out acts of violence. 
And we saw over the weekend this brutal killing of 21, I believe, Egyptian Christians in that country.  And that obviously is something that we strongly condemn, something the President condemned over the weekend.  And we certainly are going to coordinate with the international community to try to bring about some stability in Libya and make that a much less hospitable place for extremist groups to carry out acts of violence like this.
Q    On Syria, does the President think that some Syrian rebels should be able to call airstrikes and they could be as effective as the Peshmerga was in Iraq calling airstrikes on ISIS?
MR. EARNEST:  Well, what we have said in general is that the United States and our coalition partners are prepared to back up the efforts of local fighters on the ground with airstrikes.  And many have noted that the track record of some local fighters in Syria against ISIL is not particularly good, that in battle after battle ISIL has succeeded in defeating those rebels.  But we would anticipate that, with better training and better equipment, that those rebels would perform better.  That's why there is this American-led effort, in close coordination with our partners in the region, to train and equip moderate Syrian opposition fighters.
We've also indicated that we would expect that with better training and equipment and the backing of sophisticated military airstrikes, that their performance on the battlefield would improve.  So we certainly would envision a time in which military airpower would be used to back up the efforts to fighters on the ground.
You may be asking a more specific or even --
Q    The ability to call in those airstrikes.
MR. EARNEST:  For the way in which those local ground forces would interact with coalition military aircraft, I'd refer you to the Department of Defense on that and on exactly how that communication would take place.  But part of our strategy here is predicated on the idea that military airpower could be used to enhance the performance of Syrian opposition fighters on the battlefield.
Ed.
Q    Josh, a couple things.  And it his op-ed about the summit, the President -- you mentioned this a couple times -- the President wrote, “Efforts to counter violent extremism will only succeed if citizens can address legitimate grievances through the democratic process.”  When it comes to groups like ISIS, what legitimate grievances do you think they have that should be taken through the democratic process??
MR. EARNEST:  Well, I think when we're talking about ISIL leaders, there is nothing that they could possibly use to justify the brutality that we’ve seen them carry out; that this is an ideology that is totally bankrupt and is impossible to justify.  And that's why I think you haven’t just seen a strong reaction from the United States to counter their efforts, you've actually seen a strong reaction from more than 60 countries around the world that have joined with the United States to take the fight to degrading and ultimately destroying ISIL.
Q    So given that, what would the legitimate grievances of either ISIS or any other extremist group be?
MR. EARNEST:  Ed, I don't have the op-ed in front of me.  But I believe that that's actually a reference to the efforts of the administration and obviously local law enforcement and other community leaders here in this country to prevent ISIL from succeeding in recruiting and inspiring people to join their fight. 
And one part of that strategy is trying to remove grievances that those individuals may have.  And that is part of why so much of the outreach that we're doing to communities across this country isn’t just through law enforcement, but through community leaders that also have an interest in trying to protect their youth and making sure that they are aware of the kinds of support and opportunities that exist in their communities. 
Q    But the full quote was, “Governments that deny human rights play into the hands of extremists who claim that violence is the only way to achieve change.  Efforts to counter violent extremism will only succeed if citizens can address legitimate grievances through the democratic process.”  So I’m just struggling to understand.  So to be clear, ISIS doesn't have any legitimate grievances.  Are there any extremists that have legitimate grievances?
MR. EARNEST:  Well, again, Ed, the point of that element of the op-ed is to make clear that there is not just a need but also a benefit to ensuring that countries that are carrying out counterterrorism operations within their borders do so with proper respect for universal human rights.
One example of a country that I didn't cite earlier in terms of places where we’ve been working to try to counter terrorism and extremism is in Nigeria.  And there have been elements of assistance that the U.S. government has offered to the Nigerian government to aid their efforts.  But each time we’ve talked about that, we’ve also been mindful of the need to remind the Nigerian government that it’s important to respect those basic universal human rights, even as they carry out those counterterrorism operations.
Q    Boko Harm does not have legitimate grievances.
MR. EARNEST:  No, they don't.  But what we want to do is we want to make sure that Boko Haram doesn't have a fertile recruiting ground in Nigeria that only is enhanced if you have a Nigerian government that runs roughshod over the basic human rights and values of their citizens.
Q    A couple other quick things.  In answer to Kristen’s question about the 21 Christians being killed this weekend, you said the President put out a strong statement this weekend.  The statement on Sunday was from you.  It said “Statement by the Press Secretary.”  Just to be clear, it was not a statement from the President.
MR. EARNEST:  Yes, I misspoke on that.
Q    I just want to be clear.  And then in that statement -- that's why I want to ask you -- because you put it out, under your name -- you talked about the murder of 21 “citizens.”  And I’m curious why didn't you mention it was 21 Christians killed by Muslims?  Is that relevant?
MR. EARNEST:  It sure is, because the ISIL extremists who carried out this attack indicated that the reason that they were killing them wasn’t just because they were Egyptian, but also because they were Christian.
Q    Right.  So --
MR. EARNEST:  And I think the President has been very clear that it is -- the President talked about this actually in his prayer breakfast speech that he gave earlier this month, that there’s a responsibility of people of all faiths to stand up and speak out when individuals try to use faith and distort faith to try to justify an act of violence.
Q    So given that, why were you not clear on Sunday?  It went out under your name.  Why didn't you say 21 Christians were killed?
MR. EARNEST:  Well, Ed, I’ve tried to be clear here.  I can't account for that specific line in the statement.  But we’ve been clear there that we condemn this murder.  The President was clear in the op-ed that was published today, and on a variety of occasions I think I’ve been pretty clear here, that we condemn the outrageous killing of these Egyptian citizens because of their Christian faith.
Q    Okay.  And last one.  Two days earlier, on the 13th, you put out a statement under the President’s name about the tragic deaths of the three Muslim students at the University of North Carolina.  And in there, the President said, “No one in the United States of America should ever be targeted because of who they are, what they look like, or how they worship.”  Why was their Muslim faith relevant in that statement?
MR. EARNEST:  Well, Ed, I think as we’ve indicated, the situation in North Carolina is still under investigation.  And local law enforcement authorities there are trying to determine exactly what the motivation of the individual who has been charged with this crime was.  And so that is still under investigation.
But what is clear is that there is this principle that exists, regardless of the faith of the individual in question, that people should not be targeted because of their religion, and what they look like, or what their last name is, or how they worship.  That is true --
Q    Is there any evidence that in that North Carolina case they were targeted because they were Muslim?
MR. EARNEST:  Well, this is something that's still under --
Q    People are saying it was because of a parking space. We don't know.  It’s a local law enforcement investigation right now, as you said.  So why was their faith invoked in the President’s statement?
MR. EARNEST:  Well, Ed, I think it is important for the President in this case, as he has in many others, to articulate a pretty clear principle.  And I think it’s the kind of principle that the vast majority of Americans should be able to support, which is that people should not -- regardless of their faith -- be targeted because of what their last name is, what they look like, or how they worship.
Q    But we don't know that they were targeted because of their last name or their faith.
MR. EARNEST:  So I guess, Ed, what you could -- and I think that's acknowledged in the statement, as well.  And we have also acknowledged that this is an issue that's under investigation in North Carolina.  But I think as a principle, this is the kind of thing we should all be able to agree with.
Bill.
Q    Back on the summit.  What exactly is the take-away that you anticipate from this?  There’s no executive action.  There’s no governmental action.  It’s a talking shop.  What is the point?
MR. EARNEST:  Ed -- I’m sorry, Bill.  (Laughter.)  I meant that as a compliment.  (Laughter.)  I hope that's the way you took it.
Q    I’m sure I will after I think about it.  (Laughter.) 
MR. EARNEST:  I think the real take-away here is this is an opportunity for us to make sure that people all across the country understand what kinds of effective strategies are being put in place in places like Los Angeles and Minneapolis and Boston to try to safeguard communities all across the country.
And so there are effective strategies that they’ve used in those communities to counter the radical messaging and ideology that extremists can propagate on social media.  And we want to make sure that communities all across the country are aware of the tools that are available to them.  And I think that is a worthwhile exercise, and I think it’s certainly something that local leaders from across the country will benefit from.
But again, I guess what I would encourage you to do is, before you pass judgment on the summit, is let’s wait until the summit concludes.  And then I’d encourage you to follow up with those who participated to see whether or not they found it to be worthwhile.
Q    The extremists you mentioned are mostly Muslim, of course, but you won’t say that -- even though that is the subject of much of the discourse here today.
MR. EARNEST:  I think I did in answer to Angela’s question, that we are particularly concerned about the success that some extremists have had in inhabiting some dark corners of the Muslim world to try to distort the tenets of that religion in a way that justifies their radical ideology and their violent acts.  And that's something that we strongly condemn.  And we devote significant resources here in this country and in local communities across the country to countering that messaging.  And that will certainly be an intense focus of conversation in the context of this summit, but not the only focus.
Q    You just won’t call it militant Islam or anything like that?
MR. EARNEST:  Well, Bill, I think we’ve been very clear about what we call it and why we approach this challenge in this way.
Byron.
Q    Thanks, Josh.  New York Times reporter James Risen said yesterday that the Obama administration is the greatest enemy to press freedom in a generation, and that he plans to spend the rest of his life fighting to undo the damage to press freedom done by Barack Obama and Eric Holder.  Those are awfully strong words from a Pulitzer Prize-winning reporter.  Can I get you to react?
MR. EARNEST:  Well, Byron, I think that over the last couple of years, you've seen the Attorney General in particular take some very important steps to try to make sure this administration was striking the right balance between law enforcement’s need to protect national security and to respect the freedom of the press, a freedom that the President believes is critically important to the success of our country.  So the Attorney General has made clear that he doesn’t believe that journalists should be prosecuted or put in jail just because they’re doing their job. 
The Attorney General, in reaction to this situation, has convened meetings with well-known and influential journalists from across the country to discuss some of these issues about striking that appropriate balance.  And the feedback that he has gotten out of those meetings has been very positive; that even the Reporters Committee for the Freedom of the Press said the Justice Department had “turned a corner.”  And the Washington Post Editorial Board said, “There has been a welcome evolution by Attorney General Eric Holder on these issues.” 
So this is certainly the kind of work that the administration believes is important.  It’s also the kind of work that’s always ongoing; that as we consider striking a balance between two important competing -- in some cases, competing priorities, that we’re always going to have to evaluate what steps are being taken to strike the right balance.  And we certainly are pleased with the kind of progress that we’ve made.
Q    And I know this occurred while the briefing was underway, but Jeb Bush had some awfully harsh words about the Obama administration’s foreign policy.  He said the administration talks, but words fade, that you draw red lines but then erase them, and that you’ve shown a reckless disregard for the long-term interests of the country.  Could I just get you to react?
MR. EARNEST:  Probably not today.
Q    Finally, any details on the Chicago trip tomorrow?  Will the President be making an appearance with Mayor Emanuel or any more information?
MR. EARNEST:  We’ll have some more details on the Chicago trip out before the end of the day today, so we’ll follow up with you on that.
Jim.
Q    How could he not go to Chicago and meet with Rahm?  Are you saying that that’s not going to happen?  (Laughter.)  Can I go back to some of the questions about the summit?
MR. EARNEST:  Absolutely.
Q    Are you hoping that by the end of the summit that you’re going to find ways to enhance surveillance in Muslim communities?  Is that one of the goals of this summit?
MR. EARNEST:  Well, Jim, we’ve talked about the fact that as we address some of these challenges in communities all across the country, that it can’t be solely a law enforcement response; that obviously local law enforcement has a particularly important role to play.  And those local law enforcement agencies that have worked hard to build strong relationships in the communities that they serve and protect can be particularly effective in helping us counter this messaging.
But that’s not the only tool in the toolbox.  We also need to enlist the support and participation of community leaders, of teachers, and of others, even religious leaders, who also have an interest in trying to protect their community and trying to insulate particularly vulnerable young people from this kind of radical extremist ideology. 
And that’s a particularly difficult thing to do now, and even in some ways you could argue that it's more difficult now than it has been in the past.  You have extremists that are operating even in remote locations of the world, but because they have access to the Internet they can widely propagate their extremist ideology in ways that can be heard by people all around the world. 
That means that we have to be even more vigilant and creative as we try to counter this messaging, and there are a variety of ways that we can do that.  Some of it involves law enforcement, but also it means that it's important for us to mobilize other influential, well-respected members of the community.  In some ways, the best way to counter this radical ideology is for people who are members and leaders in that community to stand up and say that it's wrong. 
Q    For all the flack that you’ve taken over not using the term Islamic extremism, or Islamic terrorism, there are members of the Muslim faith who believe that you’re picking on them.  And how do you respond to that?
MR. EARNEST:  Well, I do think that this -- I think there are a couple things about that.  The first is, it's important for the leaders of any community to not feel as if anybody is picking on them.  This sort of goes back to the value statement that Ed referred to earlier.  It's important that people understand that we are going to be committed to and protective of the notion that people should not be targeted because of what they look like or how they worship.  And that is just a basic value that is central to the founding of this country.  So there’s that part of it.
The second part of it is that --
Q    But you are, in a sense, isolating a particular faith in one respect in that -- I mean, as Bill Plante and others have asked the question, Angela asked the question -- I mean, by and large, this summit is focusing on these communities.  I mean, that’s just -- it's in black and white, it's in the list of participants that you’ve submitted to the press.  There are Islamic-American groups who are going to be protesting outside the White House today because they are concerned that this is the focus of the summit.  So why not just say it?  Just that it is what it is? 
MR. EARNEST:  Why not just say what?
Q    That concerns about extremism in Muslim-American communities or Muslim communities around the world is the focus of this summit.  It just seems like you’re tiptoeing through the tulips here. 
MR. EARNEST:  Well, I don’t think I'm tiptoeing anywhere.  I think we’ve been pretty clear about exactly what we’re trying to fight here.  This is the Summit on Countering Violent Extremism, and there is no question that radical ideologues around the globe have sought, and in some cases succeeded, in infiltrating some elements of the Muslim world to propagate their ideology and to try to distort that religion to justify their terrible acts of violence.
At the same time, Jim, they would love nothing more than for the United States to engage in a -- the United States or the West to engage in a religious war with them.  But the fact of the matter is, that is not what this is.  This is not a religious war.  This is not a war on Islam.  And those individuals do not represent Islam; the leaders of Islam say as much.  And there are a variety of ways that we can assess this.  Let me just give you one good example.
In the operation to recover and bring to justice Osama bin Laden, our operators also recovered a treasure trove of material from his residence where they were able to evaluate some of his ongoing communications and even some of his thinking about the state of al Qaeda.  And in those writings there is clear evidence that he was frustrated; that Osama bin Laden was frustrated that al Qaeda was being recognized and acknowledged and fought, not as a religious organization, but as a terrorist group. 
He even contemplated, in those writings, changing the name of al Qaeda to try to more closely identify it with Islam.  He felt like that would be helpful to their flagging recruiting efforts.  That is an indication that our efforts to be crystal-clear about what it is that we're fighting and what we're not has not just been successful, but actually frustrated the efforts of our enemies. 
And so I guess I'll just end it by saying this.  You noted that there has been some flack that we've taken.  It's worth it if that's what we need to do to make sure that we're going to continue to succeed in countering this radical ideology and making sure that we can succeed in mobilizing the international community to take the fight to them, and in the case of ISIL, to degrade and destroy them.
Q    You don't mind that flack?  You welcome it?
MR. EARNEST:  That's correct.
Q    And on ISIS, I'm just curious, in following up on Kristen’s question about what happened in Egypt -- or excuse me, what happened in Libya -- what is the best sense of this White House as to how far and how wide ISIS has spread?  And how many countries in ISIS now operating, in the view and assessment of this administration?
MR. EARNEST:  Well, Jim, what we are focused on right now is the threat that ISIL poses in both Iraq and in Syria.  And that is the place where they are trying to establish, based on their own aspirations that they’ve communicated publicly, where they’re trying to establish their own Islamic state.  And because of the efforts of the United States and the other members of our coalition, we have succeeded in blunting their progress and, in many cases, even rolling it back.
There are others around the world who have occasionally popped up and indicated that they have claimed an association with ISIL.  We're certainly mindful of the desire of ISIL to try to spread and propagate their ideology.  But where we're focused right now and where we believe ISIL is most dangerous is in this area of Iraq and in Syria, and that's why we're focusing our efforts there.
Q    The President said that he believes that ISIS is on the defensive.  He said that last week.  But it seems that they are spreading to more and more countries, and we're seeing evidence of that almost every week. 
MR. EARNEST:  I would caution you about that, Jim, because I think it's important for us to differentiate between the spread of ISIL and individuals who are trying to attract attention for themselves by claiming an association with ISIL.  Those are two very different things.  And I think the best example we have of this is the situation that we saw in Afghanistan a couple of weeks ago, where an individual who claimed to be affiliated with ISIL -- as I mentioned, I think, at the time -- that had less to do with ISIL’s success in propagating their ideology and spoke more to the kinds of internal divisions that we're starting to see in the Taliban right now. 
So, again, we're obviously going to be very cognizant of and closely monitor any of this radical ideology and any of the efforts that ISIL makes to try to spread it around the globe, even to other countries.  But our focus right now is where they’re most dangerous, and that's in Iraq and in Syria.
Q    And we shouldn’t let the briefing end without asking you about Russia.  The NATO Secretary General said that the cease-fire has not been respected in Ukraine.  If the cease-fire is dead, what’s the next move?
MR. EARNEST:  Well, Jim, what I know is that I know that the leaders of these four countries -- France, Germany, Ukraine and Russia -- are supposed to have a conversation again today, I believe via telephone, to talk about the status of the Minsk implementation plan.  And obviously, we believe that it's important for all sides to live up to that agreement.  It's also crystal-clear that the Russian-backed separatists and Russia themselves have not lived up to their commitments that they made in the context of those negotiations.  Their failure to do so does put them at risk of greater costs.  And they should be mindful of that as they consider their next steps.
But we continue to believe that the way that this situation can be resolved is around the negotiating table, and that's why we're going to continue to support ongoing negotiations.  But you're right if you point out that those negotiations are only going to be successful if the people who participate in those negotiations are willing to live up to the commitments that they have made.  And it is clear that thus far -- at least in the last few days -- the Russians and the separatists that they back have not done that.
Q    And arms to the Ukrainians -- that's still on the table as an option?
MR. EARNEST:  I don't have any update beyond how the President discussed this last week. 
Tommy.
Q    I have two quick questions.  I wanted to follow up on what you were saying about the flack you’re getting.  The phrase that everybody wants to use is “radical Islam,” and the narrative is that if you don't use the secret password, “radical Islam,” that you can't possibly defeat ISIS.  And I've heard this sort of spreading out beyond conservative circles, and I'm wondering -- because I've heard you describe in so many words what is radical Islam, which is like the hateful ideology and all that -- has there been any thought given to just disarming this whole thing by just throwing the phrase into maybe the President’s remarks or something, even if it's in a sentence in which you make clear the distinction you’ve been trying to make?  Do you know what I mean?  Sort of stop giving them something to hit against -- just say it, yeah, radical Islam, and it's not all of Islam.
MR. EARNEST:  Well, Tommy, I guess this does sort of go to what I was saying to Jim, which is that -- at least I'll speak for myself -- I'm not particularly concerned about the flack.  I just want to make sure that we're pursuing the most effective strategy.  And again, anybody who wants to evaluate that strategy can do so by taking a look at the way that Osama bin Laden himself described the state of al Qaeda and his frustration that our ability to prevent him from succeeding in declaring a religious war between Islam and the West was frustrating his efforts to advance his radical agenda; it was frustrating the efforts to that organization to recruit new members; and it even prompted him to even contemplate changing the name of his organization to try to get people to identify them as a religious organization as opposed to what they are, which is a terrorist organization. 
So I think that’s a pretty clear indication that our strategy is making progress and, like I’ve told Jim, it’s worth the flack.
Q    My second question.  The conservative media is sort of flipping out over comments that Marie Harf made this morning.  She was talking, again, about radical Islam and trying to explain that this summit is about other forms of extremism, and she brought up Joseph Kony’s Lord’s Resistance Army as an example of -- the phrase she used was Christian militant -- or a “militant Christian organization.”  So I’m wondering if you can explain the difference between calling Kony’s LRA a militant Christian organization and using a term like radical Islam.  How are you not -- in other words, how are you not avoiding the thing with Christians that you are avoiding with Islam?
MR. EARNEST:  Well, I did not see my colleague’s comments on this topic earlier today, so I don’t want to sort of weigh in and try to explain what she meant if I didn’t actually see them.  So why don’t you check with the folks at the State Department?  They may be able to explain what she was discussing there.
George, I’ll give you the last one.
Q    I wanted to go back to Ed’s question for a second.  You do seem to be tiptoeing around who the victims are.  And last week, when Jon was questioning you, you didn’t want to say they were Jewish victims in Paris, and then your statement didn’t mention Christian victims.  Assuming this isn’t coincidence, is it the administration’s belief that it’s counterproductive to stress the religion of the victims?
MR. EARNEST:  Well, that’s an interesting question.  So let’s just do it this way.  We’ll put an end to the tiptoeing -- to the extent that there’s been any -- and if people assume that I’ve been tiptoeing, let me just try to be as clear as I can and we’ll see how this works. 
As I tried to make clear to Jon last week, and as I made clear in a tweet following, there is no doubt about the motivation of the individual who carried out this attack against a Kosher market in Paris.  He was motivated by anti-Semitism, and he went to that market hoping that he could kill Jewish people, and he was targeting them because they were Jewish.
The public statements of the ISIS militants, or the people who claim to be affiliated with ISIS in Libya, indicated that they were killing these Egyptians because of their Christian faith.  And we have been crystal-clear in the statement that we put out from the President on Friday and the President’s prayer breakfast remarks earlier this month that it is wrong and completely unacceptable and unjustifiable to target people, particularly with acts of violence, because of who they are, because of who they worship, because of what their last name is, or because of what they look like.
And this is a value that we have carefully subscribed to and ardently defended, not just in this country but around the world.  And that is why you have seen the United States take military action in Iraq, for example, to try to protect the Yazidi people who were threatened by genocide, by the Islamic militants -- or the ISIL militants in Iraq when they were making progress in that country earlier this summer.  The United States took action to defend them.  And there is a long history in this country, and a proud history in this country, of the United States taking action to protect people who are being targeted because of what they look like or because of who they worship.  That is a proud tradition of this country.
To sort of blend this with the debate that we had at the end of last year, it strengthens our moral authority around the globe and it strengthens our national security when people look upon the United States as a country that’s willing to stand up and protect the people who are being targeted because of what they look like or who they worship.  And that is something -- that is a value that we believe certainly applies in this country, but we believe it's a value that applies around the world.  And it is why when the President goes and visits with foreign leaders around the globe, he makes clear how important he believes it is for those leaders to uphold the universal human values, and uphold those universal human rights, and to protect their citizens to ensure that they can exercise those universal human rights.
And this is a subject of -- this is work that’s going to be ongoing, but its work that the United States has long been committed to, and that commitment is not flagged under the leadership of President Barack Obama.
All right.  Thanks, everybody.  Have a good day.
END

	2:11 P.M. EST
The White House
Office of the Press Secretary
*Please see below for a correction and clarification, marked with asterisks.
1:16 P.M. EST
     MR. EARNEST:  Good afternoon, everybody.  Nice to see you all.  Glad you braved the cold to make it to the White House today.  I don't have anything at the top, Josh, so if you want to get us started with questions I'll let you go first.
     Q    I wanted to ask about the 800,000 Americans who won't be able to file their taxes on time because the government sent them incorrect tax information about insurance through healthcare.gov.  What went wrong?  And what is the administration doing to fix it?
     MR. EARNEST:  Well, Josh, let me just correct one fact in your question.  This should have no impact on the ability of people to file their taxes on time.  I would anticipate -- HHS has said that they anticipate that they’d be able to send these updated forms in the next couple of weeks.  So it would be ample time for people to file in advance of April 15th. 
     It's important for us to sort of take a step back here and recognize what we're talking about.  We're talking about the fact that, first of all, 75 percent of people who file their taxes will just check a box on their tax forms to indicate that they have health insurance, whether that health insurance is provided through their employer, by Medicare, or even the VA. 
     The form that you're talking about only has an impact on those who are likely to qualify for tax credits to make their health insurance more affordable.  This is health insurance that they purchased through a marketplace.  It's also true that the vast majority of people who received this form actually got the correct version of it.  So we're talking about a very small fraction of people who are affected --
     Q    Well, 800,000 people is not a very small amount of people, though.
     MR. EARNEST:  It's a small percentage of overall tax filers. You're talking about less than 1 percent of people who file taxes.  And each of these individuals are people who are eligible for tax credits -- or likely to be eligible for tax credits from the government.  So we're talking about -- the question that has to be resolved is just how substantial of a tax credit are they going to receive from the federal government to make their health insurance more affordable.  And that is the question that HHS and the Treasury Department are working to resolve.  And we do anticipate that they’ll be able to resolve this within the next couple of weeks in terms of sending out the updated form to the small percentage of people who got the wrong one.
     Q    And in terms of what went wrong and what is being done to prevent it happening again, can you give us some insight into that?
     MR. EARNEST:  Well, this is the process that's being run at CMS, so I'd encourage you to direct your questions over there to understand what sort of operational steps they’ll be taking to ensure something like this doesn’t happen again.
     Q    Okay.  The Pentagon has started laying out details about this operation to retake Mosul that is going to be getting underway in a couple months -- very specific operational details about how many Iraqi brigades, Peshmerga forces.  And I’m wondering, why detail this in advance?  Doesn’t that just give your playbook to the Islamic State and make it easier for them to prepare to defend themselves against such an attack?
MR. EARNEST:  Josh, I think I saw many of the same news reports that you may have seen on this.  This sort of operational planning that was discussed at the Department of Defense is something that’s done by the Department of Defense, so I’m not in a position to confirm the accuracy of those details.  But what we do know are a couple of things.  The first is that, of course, the Department of Defense is working closely with Iraqi security forces to train and equip them and build up their capacity so that they can take the fight on the ground in their own country to the ISIL militants that have encroached on their territory.  So this will be an effort that will be led by Iraqi security forces.
The second thing is that this is an offensive that won’t begin until the Iraqi security forces are ready.  This is something that will be Iraqi-led and it will be carried out by Iraqi security forces.  Now, they will, of course, be backed up by the coalition airstrikes that have proven quite effective on the battlefield against ISIL, and we would anticipate that with this advanced training, with new equipment, and with the strong support of coalition military airpower, that the battlefield performance of the Iraqi security forces will be enhanced.  That’s a good thing. 
But for the details about when this might commence, I’d refer you to the Department of Defense.  And as it relates to reports that we saw overnight about what that offensive may look like, I can’t confirm the accuracy of that, and I’d refer you to the Department of Defense who, again, may be in a position to offer you some more details about it.
Q    Sure.  I’m not asking you to confirm the accuracy of those reports, but is there a concern among the National Security Council that if the Pentagon is handing out the playbook for what this operation is going to look like that it could make it less effective?
MR. EARNEST:  I guess the point that I’m making here is that I cannot confirm that that is the playbook.
Q    Has the President made a decision about whether, during that Mosul operation, to send in a limited number of U.S. ground troops specifically to help call in airstrikes?
MR. EARNEST:  The President has not made that decision.  I’m not even in a position to confirm that that request has been made by his military commanders.  This is something that General Dempsey discussed in his testimony before Congress and at that point -- last fall -- and at that point, what he said was this was an option that he would consider recommending to the President.  But as of last fall, he had not made a decision to recommend to the President that that was something that American military personnel should be in the position of doing.
So I don’t have anything new to report on this.  But what is true about the strategy that we have pursued here is that we believe it is in the best interest of American national security for the Iraqi people and their nation’s military forces to fight for their own country. 
And we tried it a different way; we tried it in the previous administration by deploying more than 100,000 U.S. military personnel to go on the ground and engage in sustained offensive combat operations in Iraq.  And what we found is that the security situation improved dramatically as a result of the courage and effectiveness of American military personnel. But what we found was that that solution was not enduring.  It did not endure because there was not sufficient buy-in from the Iraqi people.  And that is why our strategy this time is necessarily different, that we want the Iraqi people to be fighting for their own country.
And that’s why the strategy -- the President has pursued this strategy because he believes it is in the national security interest of the United States, but also that the Iraqi people and the security situation in Iraq will be better off under this strategy as well.
Q    And since it’s Friday, former New York Mayor Rudy Giuliani, in his attempt to clean up some comments he made about the President not loving America, says that he couldn’t possibly have been racist with those remarks because the President has a white mother and grew up among white people.  Any reaction to that from the White House? 
MR. EARNEST:  Well, Josh, I don’t have a direct response to Mr. Giuliani’s comments, either from --
     Q    It looks like you have one to look to right there. 
     MR. EARNEST:  Why don’t you indulge me for a little bit and we’ll see if I can give you something to work with, even if it’s not a direct response to his comments.
     Many of you have been in the room when the President has delivered speeches where he’s talked about his love for this country or how the United States is a force for good in the world; in fact, it’s the greatest force for good that the world has ever seen.  And so we can send you those examples, and many of you have been in the room when he has delivered remarks like that, both in this country and around the world.
     More generally, I can tell you that it’s sad to see when somebody who has attained a certain level of public stature and even admiration tarnishes that legacy so thoroughly.  And the truth is I don’t take any joy or vindication or satisfaction from that.  I think, really, the only thing that I feel is I feel sorry for Rudy Giuliani today.
     Roberta.
     Q    On immigration.  A couple of days ago, you said that the administration would make a decision in a couple days about whether to pursue a stay of the Texas court judge’s ruling.  Has a decision been made?  And what’s the hold-up?
     MR. EARNEST:  Well, Roberta, what I can tell you is that the Department of Justice has made a decision to file a stay in this case.  I would anticipate that they will file documents at the district court level on Monday at the latest.  And so when they have filed those documents, they and we will be in a position to talk a little bit more about our legal strategy. 
That, of course, is separate and apart from our intent to pursue an appeal.  That was something that we announced in the immediate aftermath of the decision.  And we will seek that appeal because we believe that when you evaluate the legal merits of the arguments that there is a solid legal foundation for the President to take the steps that he announced late last year to reform our broken immigration system.  That’s consistent with the way that previous Presidents over the course of several decades have used their executive authority.  And that is why we’re going to continue to pursue this case through the legal system.
     Q    So by filing a stay, what does that mean for people who are considering filing their paperwork for the program?
     MR. EARNEST:  Well, the Department of Homeland Security has also put out a statement earlier this week indicating that, at this point, they’re not prepared to accept applications for the program that the President announced at the end of last year, but once we have taken some additional steps through this legal process, we may be in a position to give you an update about the status of implementing the program.  Obviously, some of this will depend on the way that the question of the stay is resolved.
     Q    Okay.  If I may jump to one other topic just briefly.  A senior Republican lawmaker, Kay Granger, has urged the administration to give Egypt fighter jets and weapons to fight ISIL, and she also wants to see weapons provided to Jordan and tools and training for the Peshmerga.  And I’m wondering whether the White House has a response to her demands and whether there’s any sort of explanation about why there’s been this hold-up with the fighter jets, specifically.
     MR. EARNEST:  Well, Roberta, as you know, each of the countries -- let me just start by saying I have not seen the remarks from Congresswoman Granger.  I’m hearing them from you for the first time.  But my initial reaction is that the countries that you and apparently she named are all countries that have a robust security relationship with the United States, a security relationship that's been enhanced under the leadership of President Obama. 
*    That's true of Egypt, with whom we have a very important counterterrorism relationship.  We’ve obviously worked through and, in some cases, are even still working through some of the differences that we have with that government.  But there is an important counterterrorism relationship between the United States and 
Israel
 Egypt, and we continue to believe that the interests of the United States are well served by continuing to have a strong counterterrorism relationship with them.
     I think something similar could be said about Jordan.  So we certainly welcome her interest in this issue.  But the administration has been focused for quite some time in making sure that we are working to maintain a strong security relationship with our allies and partners in the Middle East. 
     Jim.
     Q    Josh, just getting back to Mayor Giuliani.  Did the President have a reaction to those comments?
     MR. EARNEST:  Not that I’m aware of.
     Q    Not that you're aware of.  Okay.  And on the President’s speeches this week on the countering violent extremism, specifically the one yesterday, he talked about some of the underlying issues that lead to extremism in the Muslim and Arab world, and he talked about the need for economic opportunity, human rights, democratic rights.  But it seems that many of the countries that he would be referring to are members of his own coalition.  Is the President going to be making that case to the Emir of Qatar, for example, when he comes to the White House next week?
     MR. EARNEST:  Well, I don't want to preview those discussions, but it’s true, Jim, that it wasn’t a coincidence that the President was talking about human rights and urging those world leaders to be cognizant of universal human values and to do their part to protect them.
     We do have important relationships with those countries.  They are valuable to enhancing U.S. national security around the globe.  And, yes, the President believes that it would be clearly in the interest of those countries, their leaders, and our national security if many of those countries did a better job of protecting the basic universal human rights of their citizens; that there are certain circumstances where we know that the governments -- or governments around the world when they fail to protect those human rights, that that only makes the recruiting ground for some terrorists more fertile.  And this is what the President was talking about in his remarks.
     And so, no, it is not a coincidence that in a room full of our allies and partners, some of whom don't live up to the kinds of standards that we wish they would when it comes to human rights, that the President brought it up.
     Q    These countries are breeding grounds for terrorists?
     MR. EARNEST:  That's not what I said, and that's not what the President said.
     Q    But I mean, that is, in fact, the potential.  If he’s talking to these countries, and they have these issues. 
     MR. EARNEST:  Well, again, Jim, I’d encourage you to check the President’s speech.
     Q    Can I ask you about immigration?  Is the President ruling out a continuing resolution to keep the Department of Homeland Security open?
     MR. EARNEST:  The President believes that the Congress, particularly Republicans in Congress who now have the majority in both the House and the Senate, should fulfill their responsibility to ensure that the Department of Homeland Security doesn't shut down at the end of this month.  We're basically about a week away from the funding for the Department of Homeland Security running out.  It’s running out because Republicans insisted on not funding it for a full year at the end of last year.  And it’s on the brink of running out because Republicans have failed to take the steps that are necessary at the beginning of this year to ensure that the operations of that department are properly funded.
     So we certainly hope that they will.  There are all kinds of proposals that are floating out there, and I’m not in a position to react to any of them specifically.  But I will just say as a general matter that it is the responsibility of Republicans in Congress to do their job.
     Q    But he’ll sign something to keep things going if it’s necessary for a couple days to work out specifics, or --
     MR. EARNEST:  Well, again, I don't want to --
     Q    Is there flexibility there?
     MR. EARNEST:  I haven’t seen any sort of specific proposals like that.  But let me just also say that Congress is going to be returning from a week-long recess next week.  So on Monday, members of Congress from all over the country, many of them are going to board airplanes to return to Washington, D.C.  And as they do so, they're going to through security just like other Americans, and I hope that they're going to take a minute and look in the eye of TSA officers who are representing their country.  Those are patriotic Americans who are defending the transportation system, defending the airports, defending the safety of the traveling public.  And I hope that they will think about them as they come back to Washington, and consider what they’re going to do to fund the Department of Homeland Security. Because if they don’t, those individuals who process their luggage, who they had to look in the eye, will continue to do their job.  These are good Americans.  They’re patriotic.  They take their work seriously.  They’re professionals.  But they’re not going to get paid on time unless members of Congress step up and do their jobs.  And we’re hopeful that when Republicans confront that reality, that they’ll do the right thing.
     Jon.
     Q    Josh, coming back to the three-day summit on combatting violent extremism, why was FBI Director James Comey not invited to that summit?
     MR. EARNEST:  Well, a couple of reasons.  One is, his boss was.  The nation’s top law enforcement official, Attorney General Eric Holder, attended.  The second is, we also had local law enforcement officials from across the country who could talk about their own experience in working with community leaders to counter violence extremism in their communities.  And the third is we wanted to make sure that there wasn’t a perception that this conference was overly focused on law enforcement tactics.  Certainly, law enforcement has a very important role to play.  That’s why we had the nation’s top law enforcement official in attendance.  That’s why we had police chiefs and other law enforcement officials from communities across the country in attendance.
     But the focus here is on the broader set of tools that are available to communities all across the country to protect vulnerable people who could be susceptible to violent extremist ideology that’s propagated on social media.
     Q    But, Josh, in terms of combatting violent extremism --
     MR. EARNEST:  It’s countering violent extremism.
     Q    Okay, “countering.”  Let’s say we want to combat it, too.
     MR. EARNEST:  We do. 
     Q    So in terms of countering violent extremism, isn’t the FBI Director -- the head of the agency that is on the front line of doing exactly that.  So you’re having a summit, a three-day meeting on countering violent extremism, and you don’t invite the lead official in charge of countering violent extremism.
     MR. EARNEST:  That’s right.  We just invited his boss. 
     Q    Okay.  So you invite the Attorney General, you don’t have the FBI Director, but you did have the head of the Russian security service there.  How does that look?
     MR. EARNEST:  Hopefully, he was listening carefully when the President was talking about the importance of government respecting and protecting basic universal human rights.
     Q    But you don’t think that sends a strange message, to have the head of the Russian FSB, the successor to the KGB, at this meeting and not the FBI Director?
     MR. EARNEST:  Well, to be clear about the Russian official who attended, the United States issued an invitation to the country; and Russia, in this case, made the decision about which official from their government would represent them.  So it wasn’t as if there was an invitation that was sent specifically to this official.  This is the official that the Russian government chose to represent them at the summit.
     Q    Was there any hesitation of having that official there from Russia, given that he is on the European Union’s sanctions list related to the Russian invasion of Ukraine?
     MR. EARNEST:  Not that I’m aware of.
     Q    Another question about this.  I know you’ve gone back and forth over why the President’s officials don’t use “Islamic terror” as a term, or “Islamic extremists” --
     MR. EARNEST:  I think it’s fair to say we’ve all gone back and forth over that.
     Q    Yes, we all have.  But I just want to be -- just to button it up and be clear.  The White House, the President -- you don’t deny that in terms of the current threat, the groups that we are battling now, the primary threat are Islamic extremists?  That’s not something you disagree with, is it?
     MR. EARNEST:  Jon, there is no doubt -- and I said this, if you go back and look at the comments the last time that we went around on this, on Wednesday -- I think I was pretty clear about this, that there is a very real threat that is emanating from some of the darkest corners of the Muslim community around the world that does threaten Americans.  And that is a threat that we are very cognizant of.  And there are substantial --
     Q    Is that the primary threat we're facing right now?
     MR. EARNEST:  Well, in terms of countering violent extremism, of course, it is.  It's not the only threat that we face, but of course, it's the primary one.  There’s no doubt about that.
     Q    Okay.  And buttoning up on Rudy Giuliani, you said something interesting.  You said -- correct me, but you basically feel sorry for him.  I mean, this is kind of -- you're kind of sorry to see what’s happened here.  Do you think Rudy Giuliani has lost it?
     MR. EARNEST:  I don't know.  But, look, any time that we have -- there is somebody who has attained a certain level of public stature and even admiration, in some cases, to see that person so thoroughly tarnish their legacy, it's sad.  And again, there’s no element of schadenfreude that people are feeling around here.  The fact is, I think what people are feeling is sorry for Rudy Giuliani. 
     Q    And because, again, on this specific allegation, which -- however you want to characterize it -- but he says that he doesn’t believe the President loves America. 
     MR. EARNEST:  Well, again, there are a number of examples -- and, Jon, you’ve traveled around the world with the President so you know firsthand that there are a number of situations in which the President said exactly that.  The most high-profile example that I can think of was actually the last line of this year’s State of the Union in which the President said, “God bless this country we love.”
     Q    What makes somebody of that stature, Rudy Giuliani, what makes him say something like that?
     MR. EARNEST:  I don't know. 
     Ed.
     Q    Josh, given your sorrow for Rudy Giuliani, do you think the President has any regrets about saying President Bush was unpatriotic for adding $4 trillion to the debt?
     MR. EARNEST:  Ed, I don't know if “sorrow” is the word that I would use.
     Q    You said, “I feel sorry for Rudy Giuliani.”
     MR. EARNEST:  Yes, I do.  I do feel sorry for him. 
     Q    Okay, so you feel sorry, but does the President have any regrets?  Regardless of what Giuliani said -- as a candidate, Senator Obama said that President Bush was unpatriotic.
     MR. EARNEST:  I think -- again, I haven't seen the actual comments.  I don't know if you have them there in front of you.
     Q    He said that the President -- I'm paraphrasing this part -- had added about $4 trillion to the debt, and then he said, “That's irresponsible.  That's unpatriotic.”  So I see a difference from Giuliani because he’s talking about an issue, but nonetheless questioning the patriotism of the President of the United States.
     MR. EARNEST:  I think that what the President was doing was he was questioning the specific wisdom of that decision and questioning whether or not that was in the best interest of the country.
     Q    He didn’t say that’s unwise.  He said that's unpatriotic.
     MR. EARNEST:  Right.  But again, he was talking about that.  He was not talking about a person.  And again, I think there is a lot that the President also had to say in the State of the Union about the level of our discourse, and there is no doubt that we're going to have significant disagreements across the aisle, and that is ultimately what a democracy is all about, where we go in and we debate the issues. 
But the President, as you’ll recall, in the State of the Union said we should have a debate that's worthy of the United States Congress and worthy of the country; that there are significant challenges facing this country, and that sort of resorting to a politics in which we question each other’s basic decency is not consistent with the reason that a lot of people got into public service. 
     Q    On the summit, I want to go back to what Jon was asking about James Comey.  You made clear, well, look, his boss, Eric Holder, was there.  But you also said, we wanted to make sure this wasn’t overly focused on law enforcement.  With that decision and other decisions at the summit, were you tiptoeing around not offending Muslims?  Or is there some reason why the summit was largely about just not offending Muslims for some reason?
     MR. EARNEST:  I certainly don’t think that’s the way that anybody here would characterize the summit.  I think this was an opportunity for us to have a very frank discussion with people all across the country about steps that countries can take to try to protect their communities and try to prevent people from being inspired by this radical ideology that is propagated through social media. 
And I think the goal of this summit was actually not to tiptoe around these issues but actually to confront them head on.  And that’s why we had leaders of law enforcement, we had leaders of the Muslim community who participated in this summit.  And it was an opportunity for us to have a frank discussion of these issues that certainly, as Jon pointed out, there is concern about the way that some of this ideology has infiltrated some Muslim communities.  But there’s an extremist threat that inhabits other communities in this country, and we’re mindful of those threats as well, and all of them were discussed at the summit.
     Q    In terms of confronting it head on, the former CIA Director, James Woolsey, was on CNN and said that he believes by refusing to call it Islamic terror, the President “looks scared.”  How do you respond to that?
     MR. EARNEST:  I don’t think that the countless terrorists that have been wiped off the battlefield as the result of military action that this President has ordered feel that the President is particularly fearful.
     Q    On the health care issue -- last one.  I thought your narrative was that Healthcare.gov was really doing a lot better.  Who is going to be held accountable for what seems like a pretty big mistake?
     MR. EARNEST:  Well, Ed, as I pointed out earlier, what we’re talking about is we’re talking about a form that only has -- that will actually determine the size of the tax credit that an individual will receive from the federal government that will make their health care more affordable.  We’re talking about less than 1 percent of taxpayers being affected.  And we’re talking about government agencies between HHS and CMS and the IRS that are responsible for making sure that this gets fixed and gets done right.  And that’s why we’re going to address this promptly and ensure that people can pay their taxes on time.
     Alexis.
     Q    Josh, two quick things.  When the President selected Hillary Clinton to be Secretary of State, the White House and representatives of the Clintons spent some time talking about what some of the ground rules might be to eliminate maybe conflicts with what Bill Clinton might be doing, what the foundation might be doing, what the Clinton Global Initiative might be doing. 
And my question is, in relationship to some of the reporting about potential conflicts between Secretary of States’ activities in the administration and the fundraising for the family foundation, does the President believe there are any legitimate questions that need to be answered about problems that he and his representatives wanted to eliminate at the beginning?
MR. EARNEST:  Alexis, this is a question that I haven’t given a lot of thought.  I think I’d refer you to the State Department for any sort of questions like this that may have arisen.  I’m not aware of any.  But as you pointed out, there was an effort early on to make sure that obviously the former President’s large international profile was clarified and distinct from the official U.S. government activities, and there are situations in which former President Clinton did play an important role in representing the interests of the United States government.
Obviously, there was the effort that he led to build support for rebuilding Haiti after they suffered that terrible earthquake.  Obviously, former President Clinton took a high-profile trip to North Korea to recover a U.S. citizen that had been detained there.  So obviously it’s important to keep all of those things distinct.
But as it relates to any sort of questions like this, I’m not aware of any that have been raised at this point.
Q    And to follow up -- one quick cleanup on what Josh was asking earlier.  Maybe I’m the only one who’s confused about this, but are you saying that on the final day of the summit, that the President was not aware that there was a background briefing happening at the Defense Department to outline an operation that’s supposed to happen in the spring?  You seem to be suggesting the President was not aware of this.  Am I wrong?
MR. EARNEST:  Well, I don’t know that that was the focal point of Josh’s question.
Q    Okay, so answer that question.  He is aware of this operation, right?
MR. EARNEST:  Well, you’re asking like four different things at the same time here.  Was the President aware of the background briefing that was being conducted by some military officials at the Central Command?  I don’t know that the President was --
Q    He’s aware of the operation? 
MR. EARNEST:  Well, you’re talking about an operation the details of which I’m not able to confirm.  So if you are asking about whether or not the President is aware that the United States military is engaged in an effort to strengthen and fortify the Iraqi security forces, back them up with military airpower so that they can start retaking chunks of their country -- the President isn’t just aware of that mission, he’s the one who ordered it.
Q    Right.  But maybe my confusion is about why you cannot comment on detail of the operation, but yet you can comment on the strategy?  And then we’re asking questions about --
MR. EARNEST:  The Department of Defense is responsible for setting out the operational details of a mission.  And so that’s why I’m directing questions about these operational details to the Department of Defense.
Q    So you were aware that DOD was going to brief reporters?  You -- you were aware of that yesterday?
MR. EARNEST:  Well, you were just asking about the President being aware of it, right?
Q    And now I’m asking you this.
MR. EARNEST:  I don’t know that I was necessarily aware that Central Command -- not the Department of Defense -- but Central Command was conducting a briefing.  But again, there are any number of briefings that take place across the federal government on a daily basis, and I don’t sign off on all of them.  Why are you shaking your head?
Q    It seemed like you were answering --
MR. EARNEST:  I guess if I did sign off on these background briefings I might be accused of mismanaging --
Q    No, no, no, if you were --
MR. EARNEST:  -- or micromanaging the Department of Defense, and I certainly wouldn’t want to be accused of doing that.
Okay, Cheryl.
Q    Thanks, Josh.  Getting back to the funding for Department of Homeland Security.  The President met with Senator Reid this week.  Did they discuss a path forward?  Or have you had conversations with the Hill.  What do you expect to happen next week?
MR. EARNEST:  Well, Cheryl, I think the ball is in the court of the majorities in the House and Senate to make a decision about whether or not they’re going to fulfill their responsibility to ensure that the Department of Homeland Security is properly funded.  If they don’t take action by the end of next week, then we’ll be in a position where there are DHS personnel that are showing up on a daily basis to protect our ports, to protect our borders, to protect the friendly skies, so to speak, who will be doing so without collecting a paycheck on time.  And the President doesn't believe that's fair.  He also doesn't believe that's in the best interests of our homeland security. 
So we are concerned about the impact that this disruption in funding could have on Homeland Security operations.  We're hopeful that Republicans will do the right and responsible thing, and ensure that that agency is funded.
     Q    Is that really kind of what you're expecting, is maybe a shutdown?
     MR. EARNEST:  Again, prognosticating when it comes to congressional action, particularly now that there’s this Republican majority in place, is not something I’m willing to do -- at least in public.
     Mark.
     Q    Hey, Josh.
     MR. EARNEST:  You have a birthday coming up, I see.
     Q    Yes, I do -- (laughter) -- everybody how old I am.   
     MR. EARNEST:  Happy early birthday.
     Q    Thank you.
     MR. EARNEST:  I’ll withhold those details in terms of your age.
     Q    Okay, thanks.  The tax forms that went out erroneously, I realize you're saying it’s a small fraction of the forms that went out.  But we still have nearly a million people, roughly, who are going to have to wait to file their returns.  Admittedly, they’ll be able to do that before April 15th, but many of those people are owed refunds, so this is money that the government is going to be hanging on to for weeks at least.  And they won’t be able to file for their returns.  Aren’t those people owed an apology?
     MR. EARNEST:  Well, here’s what I’ll say, Mark.  The IRS and CMS are working diligently to address this problem.  And it’s something that they take seriously.  But you were right to point out that the individuals who are affected are individuals who have received, or are receiving a tax credit from the government to make their health insurance more affordable.  And this is why they’re working expeditiously to address this problem.  And, like I said, we do anticipate that in the next couple of weeks we’ll have this cleared up.
     Q    So no apology is necessary for the fact the government is going to be hanging on to their money for weeks?
     MR. EARNEST:  Well, I guess, Mark, what we’re trying to do here is to try to solve this problem.  And certainly the American people should hold their government to a high standard and should count on these kinds of operations being implemented effectively.  And when they’re not, they should expect government officials to step forward and solve them as quickly as possible, and that’s exactly what they’re trying to do.
     Q    Some of those people also are going to have to refile their taxes, those who’ve already filed, they’re going to have a substitute form.  Is this another self-inflicted wound, Josh?
     MR. EARNEST:  Well, in terms of the mechanics about whether a refiling is necessary, I’d refer you to the IRS.  I’m not sure that that’s necessarily true.
     Q    In any event, is it another self-inflicted wound?
     MR. EARNEST:  Well, it certainly is something that we want to make sure doesn’t happen again.
     John.
     Q    I wanted to ask you, Josh, about the President’s remarks that I watched a little bit earlier.  The President spoke at the DNC, and I realize it’s sort of an opportunity to cheerlead for fellow Democrats, but this meeting comes, I guess you could say, on the heels of a very bad midterm election.  Democrats lost the Senate.  They lost more seats in the House.  Why was there, in the President’s remarks, no recognition of that?
     MR. EARNEST:  I guess, John, what the President talked very directly in his remarks about the need for the country to look forward.  And that’s what he’s focused on, is the future of the country.  And the President wanted to talk about what are the values that he believes the party should stand for.  He’s the nominal lead of the -- head of the Democratic Party, as the highest ranking elected official in the Democratic Party.  And that’s what he was there to do, was to sort of lay out what he believed was his own vision for the country and how that’s consistent with the values that our party has espoused for quite a long time.
     Q    The President, though, it seemed, was looking backwards in a way.  He said, “The American people stand right beside us on most of these issues.”  And if that’s the case, why did Democrats do so poorly in the midterm elections if they do stand beside the President on so many of these issues?
     MR. EARNEST:  Jon, people have spent the last four months or so combing through the results of the midterm elections with their own theory and analysis about the outcome.  And you’re welcome to continue doing that, but I think I’m done.
     Q    Why no mention of ISIS to this group that gathered today here in Washington?
     MR. EARNEST:  Frankly, he was speaking to a political group and focused on politics, and they did spend a lot of time talking about the economy.  But, frankly, when it comes to national security, the President doesn’t believe necessarily that that’s at the top of the list when we’re talking about politics, that’s for sure.
     Q    Josh, can I follow up?
MR. EARNEST:  Let me move around a little bit.  Byron.
     Q    Thanks, Josh.  Was the White House aware that the NSA reportedly stole information from a private European company in order to access encrypted cellphone data?  Is that something the White House is aware of or signed off on?
     MR. EARNEST:  Well, Byron, you’re talking about -- I believe you’re talking about the latest report from The Intercept, I believe that publication is called.  I don’t have any specific information about that.  I’d refer you to the NSA.  I believe that the documents, however, were -- the basis of that report were actually from the U.K.
     Q    But they dealt with a U.S. agency.  It was a joint operation.
     MR. EARNEST:  But, again, I’m not going to be in a position to confirm or to discuss the details of those documents.  I’d refer you to the U.K. government about that.
     Q    Is that a legal authority, though, that the White House claims the ability to hack a private company for security reasons, whether it’s an allied country or not?  I mean, is there a legal theory under pins --
     MR. EARNEST:  For the legal basis of some of these kinds of questions, I’d refer you to either the DNI or the NSA.
     Q    One more try.  The White House recently has talked a lot about building public-private partnerships with U.S. tech companies for cybersecurity reasons.  Can the U.S. tech industry trust the U.S. government in the wake of some of these disclosures?
     MR. EARNEST:  Well, Byron, we certainly are aware of how important it is for the United States government to work with private industry; that there are a lot of situations in which our interests are pretty cleanly aligned.  And there are certainly steps that the U.S. government has taken in the name of national security that some members of private industry haven’t agreed with.  But I do think that there is common ground when it comes to -- and this is a principle that I’ve cited before -- it’s hard for me to imagine that there are a lot of technology executives that are out there that are in a position of saying that they hope that people who wish harm to this country will be able to use their technology to do so. 
So I do think, in fact, that there are opportunities for the private sector and the federal government to coordinate and to cooperate on these efforts, both to keep the country safe but also to protect our civil liberties.  We’re talking about technology companies and technology executives that have a lot of expertise in this area.  And we can benefit from their insight and their perspective as we confront I think what everybody acknowledges are some pretty thorny public policy issues.  But by working together, we are confident that we can reach some common ground that reflects the necessary balance of protecting civil liberties, but also protecting the national security of the United States.
     Chris.
     Q    A couple things on the -- well, the second part of the Obamacare announcement today had to do with uninsured Americans, and there’s going to be a special period for them, people who didn’t realize that they were going to have to pay a penalty for not signing up for Obamacare.  Is the White House concerned that this latest problem with the taxes will reinforce a perception in some quarters that parts of Obamacare are broken and will make people who are uninsured less likely to sign up?
     MR. EARNEST:  No.  If anything, Chris, I think this is an opportunity for us to talk about the fact that there are millions of people all across the country who can go to a marketplace, who can shop for health care, and they can actually get a tax credit from the federal government to make that health care more affordable.  And so --
     Q    But you can understand why someone would say, yeah, but if I had to sign up for Obamacare I could potentially not have my tax return now, or I will have to go back to the Treasury Department, or I can’t file yet.  Does it perpetuate an idea that there are all these problems with Obamacare? 
     MR. EARNEST:  No.  Again, I think it is a good reminder that there are millions of people that stand to benefit from this law, and all they need to do is to go to the marketplace.  And there are some people who, as you point out, may still be unaware of the fact that they will face a penalty if they don’t sign up and if they haven't signed up.  And that is why the IRS and the Treasury and HHS have coordinated on what we believe is a pretty novel solution to this challenge, which is to set up a special enrollment period for individuals who did have to pay a penalty in their 2014 taxes for not having health insurance, and were previously unaware that they were required to do so. 
So there will be this limited six-week window in which those individuals can ensure that they can limit the penalty that they have to pay and actually make sure that that money is going to a good purpose, which is protecting themselves and members of their family with health insurance.
     Q    And how do you respond to Republicans who say this is just another example of how this was not well thought out, that it’s a constantly moving target, they’re constantly changing the rules of the game?
     MR. EARNEST:  Well, again, I think what I would do is I would just refer them to the seniors across the country who have saved billions of dollars on their prescription drugs because of the Affordable Care Act.  I’d refer those Republicans to the fact that since the Affordable Care Act went into effect, health care costs have grown at the slowest rate in recorded history.  I would note that the uninsured rate in the United States has gone down faster than at any time since the early 1970s. 
And I’d just point out also that hospitals have saved an estimated $5.7 billion just last year in lower, uncompensated care costs.  That’s good for our deficit.  It’s certainly good for the bottom line of those hospitals.  And it’s also good for every American in the country that has insurance, because it’s going to have an impact on their premiums.
     So there are substantial benefits associated with the Affordable Care Act.  And I recognize that it’s awkward for some Republicans who voted against the law that has resulted in such significant benefits for the country.  That’s probably pretty difficult for them to explain, so I can imagine that they may be looking for an opportunity to try to wriggle out of that.  But that’s going to become just more and more difficult as time moves on here.
     Q    If I could read one sentence from the President’s remarks today at the DNC, taking them out of context.  But he said, “It’s making a nation we love more perfect.”  Was that written in after as a response to Rudy Giuliani?
     MR. EARNEST:  It was not.  As I pointed out, the President said something very similar at the end of the State of Union address this year -- “God bless this country we love.”  So the fact is the President often talks about his love for this country.  It’s not unique.
     Lori, nice to see you.
     Q    Good to see you, Josh.  What is the reaction of the administration to the latest events in Venezuela?  And also, President Nicolás Maduro accused the government, the U.S. government of trying to overthrow his government in a plot that they say they discovered last Wednesday.
     MR. EARNEST:  These allegations that we’ve seen from the Maduro government, like all previous such allegations, are ludicrous.  The fact is the Venezuelan government should stop trying to blame the United States and other members of the international community for events inside Venezuela.  The Venezuelan government actually needs to deal with the grave situation that it faces. 
The United States is not promoting unrest in Venezuela, nor are we attempting to undermine Venezuela’s economy or its government.  In fact, the United States remains Venezuela’s largest trading partner.  The Venezuelan government should stop trying to distract attention from the country’s economic and political problems, and focus on finding real solutions through democratic dialogue among the people of Venezuela.  The Venezuelan government should respect the human rights of its citizens and stop trying to intimidate its political opponents. 
And we continue to call on the Venezuelan government to release political prisoners, including dozens of students; opposition leader; and Mayors Daniel Ceballos and Antonio Ledezma. 
Q    The U.S. government has already taken some actions against Venezuelan individuals with some sanctions.  Are you considering any other action?  Are you seeking -- maybe seeking help from other countries in the hemisphere, like Brazil, that could put pressure on the government of Nicolás Maduro?
MR. EARNEST:  Well, I can tell you that the Treasury Department and the State Department are obviously closely monitoring this situation and are considering tools that may be available that could better steer the Venezuelan government in the direction that they believe they should be headed.  That obviously means that we’re continuing to engage other countries in the region in talking about operating in coordinated fashion as we deal with the situation there.
But ultimately, it’s going to be the responsibility of the government of Venezuela to stop blaming other countries, including the United States, for their problems, and start tackling them head-on.
Q    Could I ask you one last question?  This is in regard to an emergency stay.  The Justice Department I understand will file probably by Monday.  If that is denied, what would be the next step for the administration?  And how frustrated would you be that these DACA/DAPA would not be implemented?
MR. EARNEST:  Well, I don’t want to assume the rejection of a legal document that has not yet been created or filed yet.  So we’ll have an opportunity to talk about this more next week, I’m sure. 
But the thing that you should remember is, in addition to the stay that we do anticipate will be filed by Monday at the latest, the U.S. government will be appealing the decision.  And the reason for that is we continue to believe that there is a solid legal foundation for the steps that the President has taken to bring some accountability to our broken immigration system.
And there are a couple of other important points that are worth noting about the ruling.  The first is that the ruling did prevent the federal government from issuing work permits and requiring state agencies to issue driver’s licenses and other documentation.  And I recognize that this is a ruling that some Republicans have cheered.
The fact of the matter is, those steps are exactly the kind of steps that are required to bring millions of people out of the shadows, to make them submit to a background check, to make them pay taxes, to make them get right with the law.  It’s surprising to me that that kind of accountability is something that Republicans would actually oppose, not to speak of the kinds of significant economic benefits that would be associated with these individuals actually paying taxes.
The second thing is, the court ruling doesn’t, however, touch the ability of this administration to make decisions about prosecutorial discretion.  And one element of the President’s proposed reforms was to ensure that our enforcement activities were focused on felons and not on families; that we believe that these efforts should be focused on rounding up and deporting individuals that have a criminal history, individuals that may pose a national security threat of some kind, or individuals who may otherwise pose some kind of public safety threat to the communities in which they're living.
     What we should not be doing is using those very important but insufficient enforcement resources to focus on separating families; that, frankly, we need to be focused on the public safety risk that's out there.  And that's why -- DHS can provide you these materials -- or these metrics.  But what we're seeing is an increasing number or increasing percentage of deportations has been individuals with a criminal history.  And that's an indication that our enforcement efforts are improving on this scale.
     And thanks to the efforts of the President and this administration to exercise prosecutorial discretion, we're going to see that metric continue to improve.  And that's going to mean safer communities for everybody.
     Bill.
     Q    Back to cybersecurity and hacking.  The Journal yesterday said that three months after the State Department discovered hackers in its system, they're still there.  Last fall, I think around the end of October, you announced that there had been hackers discovered in the White House system.  Are they still there?
     MR. EARNEST:  Well, the update that I have for you on the incident here at the White House is that we have taken appropriate steps to address the activity of concern and protect our systems. 
     And although we have addressed this particular incident, we're mindful of the fact that networks at the White House will continue to be a target.  So we're going to continue to monitor our networks for additional activity of concern.
     Over the course of that intrusion, I can tell you that our computer systems were not damaged, though some elements of the unclassified network were affected when we took our initial mitigation steps.  And that's something that we talked about before, as well.
     We’ve restored the vast majority of services that we took offline during those mitigation efforts, and are continuing to take additional steps to bolster our defenses.  We're also focused on longer-term efforts to implement broad cybersecurity initiatives that will further protect not just the computer network here at the White House but all across the federal government.
     Q    So are you saying that there have been no further intrusions into the White House system?
     MR. EARNEST:  Well, what I’m saying is that we’ve taken appropriate steps to address this specific activity and the concern that we discussed last fall.  And we’ve taken the necessary steps to ensure that our systems are protected.
     Q    So you're not saying that there have been no further intrusions?
     MR. EARNEST:  Well, what I’m saying is as much as I can.
     Q    Well, and are you concerned about the State Department situation?
     MR. EARNEST:  Well, yes, of course we are.  We are certainly monitoring that situation, as well, but in the same way that we monitor reported breaches of computer systems that affect U.S. agencies, U.S. companies and U.S. infrastructure.  Now, we’d note that the Department of State has been working closely with a variety of government agencies, including the FBI, on a comprehensive investigation and a specific response to the intrusion that’s taken place over there.  And that work is ongoing.
     Scott.
     Q    Josh, on this question of the sort of awkward partnership with countries in the Middle East that contribute to the kind of grievances the President was talking about.  He was asked about this specifically last month.  He’d just given a speech in India talking about religious tolerance and women’s rights, and then he was headed to Saudi Arabia.  And he said at the time, “Sometimes we have to balance our need to speak to them about human rights with our immediate concerns in terms of countering terrorism and dealing with regional stability.”  So my question is:  Is the President comfortable with the way that balance is struck right now?  Or is he worried that our immediate security concerns may be planting seeds for trouble down the road?
     MR. EARNEST:  Well, I think, Scott, this is something that's evaluated on an ongoing basis.  But I think that the President’s commitment to ensuring that the United States continues to be a beacon of liberty, and a country that stands at the vanguard of protecting basic universal human rights, is embodied in the fact that the President, when standing before these world leaders, brought it up.  Nobody asked him a question in the context of yesterday’s summit.  He brought it up proactively and talked about the need for countries to live up to their requirements that they respect and protect the universal human rights of their citizens.
     And the President did that for a variety of reasons.  The first is, it’s consistent with our values.  But the second is, as he explained, it’s consistent with the kinds of steps that countries around the world can take to counter violent extremism; that as countries take steps that are detrimental to human rights, it can enhance the ability and create a more fertile recruiting ground for extremists.  And that's exactly the threat that we're trying to counter.
     But the President has been pretty forthright about the need to balance all of those concerns.  There are countries that don't have the kind of human rights record that we’d want them to have that yet still continue to be good partners with the United States in a way that is advantageous for our national security.  So there is -- these are complicated issues, ones that are constantly under evaluation here.  But the President’s seriousness about these issues and about speaking up and speaking out for human rights -- both because of the values associated with it, but also because of the impact it has on our national security -- again, I think is consistent with his decision to raise it proactively at yesterday’s summit.
     Fred.
     Q    Thanks, Josh.  A couple things.  First, with the DNC winter meeting going on today, does the White House have any comment regarding the controversy in Florida with Debbie Wasserman Schultz and the allegation that she was willing to change her position on the medical marijuana?
     MR. EARNEST:  I’m not aware of that situation, Fred.  I’d refer you to the Congresswoman’s office. 
     Q    Okay.  It was reported in Politico that she talked to a donor and asked him to take back his criticism of her if she would change her position.
     MR. EARNEST:  I didn’t see the report.  I’ll have to go take a look at it.  Apologies to all Politico executives out there. 
     Q    Another question then.  On the minimum wage, you’ve talked about that with the Walmart situation.  Is there an argument, though, to be made if Walmart is doing this voluntarily, that they see an economic benefit for their part, then there may not be a need for the government to step in and mandate a wage, if the private sector is taking the lead on this?
     MR. EARNEST:  Well, that’s certainly one argument.  I think the argument, though, Fred, that I would make is that executives at Walmart certainly have a strong track record of understanding the kinds of business decisions that they can take that will enhance their bottom line.  And what these executives concluded is that offering more flexible scheduling policies to their workers and raising their wages was good for their bottom line and good for business.
     So the reason I think it’s notable is that Republicans’ excuse for not raising the minimum wage is that it’s bad for business.  So I think this is the reason that we hold up this example, as we have with other private sector companies that have also sought to raise their workers’ wages.  They find that it’s good for business.  They find that it’s good for the economy, and they find that it’s good for their bottom line.  We believe everybody should benefit from it.
     Q    Would it be good for all businesses, though, or just those that are as big as Walmart?  I mean, some businesses might not be able to afford it as well.
     MR. EARNEST:  Well, again, this is something that when you look at the macroeconomic impact and when you look at the individual experience of businesses, that they have found that it’s good for the bottom line.  And there are a number of small businesses that we’ve held up as employers who are doing the right thing by their employees.  And, again, I’m confident that as business owners, they are not motivated solely by charity.  They’re also motivated by profit, and they do believe that this is good for their bottom line, that it allows them to do a better job of retaining their workers, which cuts down on their training costs.  It also inspires greater loyalty among their workforce.  And that is a good thing. 
And, again, this can take a variety of forms.  It can take -- it could be as simple as increasing the pay in their paycheck.  It can also take the form of offering up paid sick leave or policies that allow a flexible work schedule.  These are the kinds of things that will make a real difference in the lives of middle-class families.  And that’s why the President has advocated putting in place these policies all across the country, not just in a few select locations where they’ve chosen to take action.
     Mark.  Another birthday boy.
     Q    Thanks.
     MR. EARNEST:  Happy birthday.
     Q    Thanks.  Is there a “birthday interview with the President program” that I might qualify for?  (Laughter.)
MR. EARNEST:  If so, it seems like there would be a lot of radio reporters interviewing the President today, between you and Mark, and I saw that one of your colleagues at Sirius XM is having a birthday today, Tim Farley.  So something in the water, I guess, about being born on this day.
Q    I don’t mind going first.  (Laughter.) 
MR. EARNEST:  I’m sorry?
Q    I don’t mind going first.
MR. EARNEST:  Oh, okay.
Q    I thought it was part of your “send a fourth-grader to the park” program.  (Laughter.)  Will some of yesterday’s trip to Chicago be billed out as political travel?
MR. EARNEST:  I don’t believe so.  The President was using his -- again, another example of the President using his executive authority, his official authority, to travel to Chicago and designate Pullman Park as a national monument.
Q    He stopped at a phone bank for Rahm Emanuel, and he gave remarks there that were totally partisan.  Doesn’t that qualify as political travel?
MR. EARNEST:  Well, I’d have to check with the attorneys.  I don’t believe that it does.  It means there’s a political stop, but the reason for the travel was to make this presidential announcement about the Pullman National Monument.
Q    But under the rules, aren’t you required to deduct some of the taxpayer-supported travel from political travel?
MR. EARNEST:  Well, let’s -- I can follow up with you and we can dig in on the rules on this.
Q    Would you?
MR. EARNEST:  Yes.
*Given the campaign stop for Mayor Emanuel, Thursday’s travel to Chicago has been deemed a mixed official and political trip. Consistent with past practice, we follow all rules and regulations to ensure that the DNC or other relevant political committee pays what is required for the President to travel to political events.
Q    Okay, and one other question.  Did the President make any decision yesterday about the site for his presidential library?
MR. EARNEST:  The President has not made any decisions, but he did have the opportunity to get a briefing, get a little update on the progress of the committee that’s been formed to evaluate the proposals that have been put forward by a number of locations; I believe they include New York, Hawaii and Chicago. 
But the President has not made any decisions yet.  I think one way you can tell that it was not a decision-making meeting necessarily is that the First Lady wasn’t there.  I anticipate that she’ll have some input on this decision, as well.  But when we’re ready to -- when a decision has been reached and we’re ready to roll out an announcement, I’m sure you’ll be hearing from the committee.
Q    It lasted two hours, the meeting.  It seems like they had a lot of time to discuss the issue.
MR. EARNEST:  Well, I’d note that a lot of the people who participated in that meeting are also friends of the President, so my guess is they were mixing a little business and pleasure.
Andrew.
Q    A question on Libya.  Islamic State has claimed responsibility for bombings that have killed up to 40 people in eastern Libya today.  Why is there a military response to Islamic State in Syria and Iraq and not in Libya, given these increased number of attacks that you’re seeing there?
MR. EARNEST:  Well, let me say a couple of things about that.  The first is that the United States condemns today’s terrorist attack near Qubba, Libya that took the lives of more than 40 innocent victims, as well as all the other violence and terrorist acts that have been inflicted on Libya, its people, and others living in Libya in recent months.  We send our condolences to the victims and their families, and to the people of Libya as they continue to fight back against terrorism.
This latest terrorist attack underscores the need for all Libyan parties, including General National Congress members, to participate in the U.N.-led dialogue convened by Bernardino León, the Special Representative to the U.N. Secretary General, to form a national unity government.  Those who choose not to participate are excluding themselves from discussions which are critical to combatting terrorism, as well as to the overall peace, stability and security of Libya.
The best way to counter these terrorists who are operating in Libya is to help the Libyan people build the national consensus that they need to fight these groups instead of each other.  And ultimately, that is what we’re focused on, is that we have seen that violent extremists and terrorists have sought to use instability in one country or another to establish a safe haven.  That’s certainly what they have attempted to do in Yemen.  It’s certainly what they had designs on doing in Syria.  And that is why you’ve seen the United States take pretty aggressive action in both of those places to counter their ability to establish a safe haven there.
We’re mindful, and have been for some time, of the ongoing insecurity and instability inside of Libya.  And we have been supportive of this U.N.-led dialogue to try to bring some more stability to that situation; and in doing so, it will enhance the ability of the central government to provide for the security of the Libyan people and ensure that radical extremists and terrorists are not able to use it as a safe haven to carry out attacks either against the Libyan people or against other people in the region.
So we’re very mindful of the situation in Libya.  We obviously condemn in the strongest possible terms today’s terrorist attacks.  And it’s a situation that we’re going to continue to monitor.  But while we do that, we’re going to continue to be supportive of the U.N.-led dialogue.
Q    And just another one on Ukraine.  The State Department said that the Russian-backed rebels have broken the ceasefire 250 times.  Are more sanctions now inevitable?
MR. EARNEST:  Well, the United States does continue to be deeply troubled by ongoing military operations conducted by Russian-backed separatists in Ukraine, which have continued despite Russian and separatist commitments to an “immediate and comprehensive ceasefire.”  This is a commitment that they reaffirmed in the February 12th Minsk Implementation Plan.
Russia and the separatists it backs have acted in direct contravention of the Minsk Implementation Plan.  And we call on all the signatories to that document to carry out the commitments undertaken in the plan, and the September Minsk agreements, fully and without delay.  Despite these aggressive actions, we continue to support a negotiated solution to the crisis.  At the same time, we’ve made repeatedly clear that President Putin has a choice.  We’ve also made it crystal clear that the longer that the Putin regime continues to refuse to abide by the commitments that they have made in the context of diplomatic negotiations, that the risk of higher costs will continue to increase.
We have seen that the sanctions regime that’s already been in place only tightens as time goes by, that Russia becomes further isolated.  And whether you evaluate the investment climate in Russia or the value of the currency, or future projections of economic growth, that Russia has taken a hit and that hit worsens as the weeks and months go by.
So that’s the status quo, is that the impact of the sanctions regime is having more of a bite.  What’s also possible is that it’s possible that there could be additional costs over and above those increasing costs that could be imposed.  But any sorts of decisions like that will be made in coordination with our allies in Europe, and we have valued the kind of close cooperation we’ve gotten so far from our allies over there.  And that cooperation will continue in an effort to maximize the impact of these costs
Q    I guess my question is, if you’re saying they’ve broken the ceasefire 250 times, how many times do they have to break it before you say, okay, we’re not thinking about this anymore, we’re going to implement more sanctions?
     MR. EARNEST:  Well, that’s a legitimate question.  And certainly as we see Russia fail to live up to those commitments -- and President Putin in particular fail to live up to those commitments -- it does put them at risk of facing even higher costs.  And the question has always been -- and this is a question that I’ve gotten in this room before -- has always been, at what point do the costs become sufficiently high that Russia and President Putin reevaluates his strategy for his country’s actions in eastern Ukraine? 
And that’s something that we’re going to continue to watch.  And if the President determines in consultation with our allies in Europe that additional sanctions are needed and additional costs should be imposed, then we’ll act in coordinated fashion to impose them.
     Jessica, I’ll give you the last one.
     Q    Just going back to the Mosul attack briefing.  I just wanted to be clear in your answer to Alexis:  Did you or did you not know that CENTCOM was doing a briefing with reporters?
     MR. EARNEST:  Well, again, as I explained to Alexis, I am not aware of all of the background briefings that are -- or even on-the-record briefings that are conducted all across the federal government on a daily basis.
     Q    Was there any effort by the White House to make coalition partners aware that CENTCOM would be discussing the operational details of the Mosul attack?
     MR. EARNEST:  Well, again, I’m not in a position to confirm that the details that they cited are accurate, but there is a lot of intensive international coordination that actually goes on at CENTCOM.  Many of you will recall that when the President went to CENTCOM last fall, he met with representatives from other countries who are integrated with the efforts at CENTCOM.  And we take very seriously, and I know the Department of Defense takes very seriously the responsibility that they have to closely coordinate with our partners and allies who are part of this coalition.
     So, again, you’d have to check with Central Command about whether or not they incorporated these foreign representatives either in that briefing, during the briefing, or in advance of it. 
     Q    So it wouldn’t be the White House role there to inform coalition partners on that?
     MR. EARNEST:  Well, again, not necessarily.  Not necessarily.
     Q    And what about informing Qatar that they were going to be outed as a training site when they hadn’t been before?
     MR. EARNEST:  Well, again, I don’t know that they were outed.  I’m not aware that --
     Q    (Inaudible) before.
     MR. EARNEST:  Well, it doesn’t mean that Qatar wasn’t ready to announce it.  The President, however -- I guess this is a good segue to the week ahead.  The President will be hosting the --
     Q    I tee’d it up for you.
     MR. EARNEST:  There you go, it was good. 
The President will host the Emir of Qatar, Sheikh Tamim, at the White House on Tuesday, February 24th.  The President looks forward to discussing with Sheikh Tamim political, economic, and security issues of mutual concern to our two countries.  The United States and Qatar have a longstanding partnership, and this meeting is an opportunity to further that relationship, along with our shared interest in supporting stability and prosperity in the Middle East.  So I’m jumping ahead.  That meeting will occur Tuesday here at the White House.
     On Monday, the President will meet with the National Governors Association.  In the afternoon, he’ll participate in an ambassador credentialing ceremony in the Oval Office.  At this event, as you’ve seen in the past, the President will receive the credentials from foreign ambassadors recently posted in Washington.  The presentation of credentials is a traditional ceremony that marks the formal beginning of an ambassador service in Washington. 
I mentioned that on Tuesday the President will meet with Sheikh Tamim.
On Wednesday, the President will travel to Miami, Florida to participate in an immigration town hall meeting hosted by Telemundo.  Further details about the President’s travel to Florida will be made available in coming days. 
On Thursday, the President will attend meetings at the White House.  That evening, the President and First Lady will host a reception celebrating Black History Month in the East Room. 
And then on Friday, the President will welcome President Ellen Johnson Sirleaf of Liberia to the White House.  President Sirleaf’s visit comes at a time of critical cooperation between the United States and Liberia.  The President looks forward to building on a strong and historic partnership with Liberia and discussing a range of topics with President Sirleaf, including the ongoing Ebola response, the region’s economic recovery plans, and other issues of mutual interest.
With that, I hope you all have a tremendous weekend.  Thank you.
Q    Josh, are we going to get any readouts about calls to foreign leaders today?
MR. EARNEST:  There is a possibility of that, so stay tuned.
Q    Will there be a veto event next week on Keystone?
MR. EARNEST:  If there is, we’ll let you know.
Q    Did you get anything on the Ayatollah that I asked you about?
MR. EARNEST:  Actually, I did, so I'm glad that you brought that up.  Let me get through this. 
What I was reminded of after our discussion on this topic on Wednesday is that the President on a couple of times has been asked this directly, and the President himself has said that he tends not to comment on communications that he has had with foreign leaders.  He has in the past acknowledged exchanging letters with the Supreme Leader. 
But as I said on Wednesday, we don’t have any new details to share with you.  The one thing I will say is that contrary to some recent reports, there has been no recent letter from either side.  Speaking more broadly about our policies vis-à-vis Iran, our message both in private and in public has been consistent:  That the United States will not allow Iran to obtain a nuclear weapon and that we encourage them to engage constructively with the international community to resolve the international community’s concerns about their nuclear program.
As you’ve also heard us say, we’ve raised significant concerns about Iran’s support for terror activities and other destabilizing activities in the Middle East.  And we often, and even in the context of these letters, have raised concerns about Americans who are being held against their will, or are missing in Iran.  And those are things that we have said publicly many times, and that’s consistent with the private messages that the President has communicated to the Supreme Leader in letters that they’ve previously exchanged.
Q    Thanks, Josh.
MR. EARNEST:  Thanks, guys.
                           END             2:28 P.M. EST
The White House
Office of the Press Secretary
James S. Brady Press Briefing Room
1:13 P.M. EST
MR. EARNEST:  Good afternoon, everybody.  It’s nice to see you all.  You just got the readout of the President’s meeting with the Amir of Qatar.  They had an opportunity to speak for themselves to readout that meeting.
Other than noting that, I don’t have anything at the top here so we can go straight to questions.  Jim, do you want to get us started?
Q    Sure.  Thank you.  First of all, the Keystone bill is arriving at the White House today, or already has.
MR. EARNEST:  That’s what I hear.
Q    Can you tell us when the President intends to veto it, as he promised?
MR. EARNEST:  Well, as I mentioned yesterday, the President does intend to veto this piece of legislation and we intend to do it without any drama or fanfare or delay.  So I would anticipate that we’ll have an update on this later on today.
Q    So you expect it today?  We can expect it today?
MR. EARNEST:  Yes, you can count on that today.
Q    Coverage or paper statement?
MR. EARNEST:  We’ll have a statement through the usual channels.
Q    No photo spray or anything?
MR. EARNEST:  No.
Q    It’s in the pipeline.  (Laughter.)
MR. EARNEST:  Wouldn’t want that news to leak out some other way.  (Laughter.)
Q    You physically have the bill now?
MR. EARNEST:  It’s my understanding that Congress did send the text of the bill to the White House this morning.
Q    On DHS funding, as you know, the Senate Majority Leader has offered to split the bill so that there’s a separate vote on the immigration policies of the President and another one on the funding itself.  Senator Reid has objected to the sequencing of that.  He wants to vote on the clean funding bill first before you go on to immigration.  Does the President have a preference on that?  Does the President want to at least just get this issue off the table and it doesn’t matter on sequencing?  What’s the White House’s position?
MR. EARNEST:  The official White House position is that the President served in the United States Senate for a period between 2004 and 2008, in which he readily weighed in on legislative maneuvers and strategies related to the complicated procedures that essentially guide the legislative process.  At this point, it’s the responsibility of Congress to figure out how to perform among their most basic functions, which is to ensure that the budget for the Department of Homeland Security gets passed in a timely fashion.
Q    But, Josh, this is his party and it could essentially end up closing one of his executive agencies.
MR. EARNEST:  The President has -- well, Republicans spent a lot of time and a lot of money and a lot of effort going around the country about making the case why they should be put in charge of the United States Congress.  They succeeded in that effort, and they persuaded the American people to hand them the responsibility of the majority of both the United States House of Representatives and the United States Senate.  And the question now facing Republicans is how they’re going to use that authority and whether or not they’re going to do it responsibly, in a way that’s in the best interest of the country and whether or not it’s in the best interest of our national security. 
And the fact of the matter is I can’t find anybody who thinks it’s a good idea to shut down the Department of Homeland Security, which means that congressional Republicans should simply do their job.  And they should pass legislation that would fully fund the Department of Homeland Security for the remainder of this year.
Q    And Senator McConnell is offering a clean bill like you demanded, so why not get behind this bill?
MR. EARNEST:  Well, I haven’t seen the particulars in terms of exactly what he’s put forward, but ultimately it will be up to the individual members of Congress to make their own decision.  But, again, congressional Republicans are in charge.  They’re in the majority.  And this is something that they sought, and these are exactly the kinds of problems that they hoped to have the opportunity to solve, and we look forward to them doing it.
Q    Next question on Iran.  The contours of the deal that are being discussed would allow Iran to potentially consider moving toward a nuclear device after 10 years.  And I’m wondering if that’s a period of time -- I know that parts of the discussion have been about a 20-year period before -- that seems to be the compromise number.  Is that a number that we can trust the Iranians to stick by and not to begin producing a nuclear device after that?
MR. EARNEST:  Well, Jim, I'm loathe to get into the negotiating details of the position that is adopted by the United States and our international partners when they are sitting across the table from the Iranians.  However, I will say that there was a report today indicating that we were negotiating for essentially a 10-year deal.  Those reports are not correct.  That does not reflect the accurate negotiating position of the United States and our international partners. 
But the second part of your question is important as well.  It goes to whether or not the United States and the international community is prepared to start trusting the Iranians.  I think the point, Jim, of these negotiations is to not just reach an agreement with the Iranians, but reach an agreement with the Iranians that we can verify on a continuing, ongoing basis; that there is ample reason for the international community to not put a lot of faith in the claims of the Iranians when it comes to their nuclear program.  It was just a few years ago that there was this covert nuclear facility in Iran that had previously been undeclared that did yield some evidence indicating that Iran was trying to secretly develop a nuclear weapon. 
So what we need is a clear agreement from the international community and the Iranians and an agreement that is verifiable.  And any part of an agreement will include ready access by the international community to ensure that Iran is living up to their end of the bargain.
Q    But you're saying that reports that the deal would clamp down on Tehran’s nuclear activities for at least 10 years and then slowly ease those restrictions, that isn't correct?
MR. EARNEST:  Well, again, I'm not willing to get into the specific details of our negotiating position.  But there are some who are making the case publicly that we are in favor of a deal that would just be 10 years in duration, and that is not accurate.
Roberta.
Q    On Keystone, the veto is one thing, but I'm wondering, how long is it going to take the administration to finish its review of whether the project is in the national interest?  Is that something that’s going to happen today as well?
MR. EARNEST:  This is a review that is being conducted by the State Department, and so you can contact the State Department for an update on the timing of that review.
Q    The President isn't going to announce something on that as well today?
MR. EARNEST:  Again, the review is being conducted by the State Department, so you can get an update from them about their timing.
Q    Secondly, there are reports that the DOJ is not going to press charges against George Zimmerman for the shooting of Trayvon Martin.  Can you confirm that?
MR. EARNEST:  I can't confirm that.  So you should check with the Department of Justice about any announcement they may or may not be planning to make at this point.
Q    Okay.  Lastly, on Ukraine, Prime Minister David Cameron said he would deploy military personnel in the next month to Ukraine to help with training, and I'm wondering if that's something that the U.S. is considering -- any measures to help Ukraine with military training?
MR. EARNEST:  Well, let me say a couple things about this.  The first is that the United States continues to be concerned by ongoing violations of the Minsk Implementation Plan by Russian-backed separatists in Ukraine.  We have seen repeatedly that these Russian-backed separatists have continued to violate the terms of the agreement despite the fact that they made firm commitments in the context of an immediate and comprehensive cease-fire.
In addition to that, we have seen Russian military vehicles -- I'm sorry -- we have seen Russian military personnel have participated in the recent attacks on Vuhlehirsk and Debaltseve. And the Russian military has put in place a robust command structure in eastern Ukraine.  We know this because separatist fighters have also previously acknowledged that they are operating under instructions from Moscow.
Russia and the separatists it backs have acted in direct contravention of the Minsk Implementation Plan that they agreed to.  And we continue to call on all signatories to carry out the commitments undertaken in the plan in the September Minsk Agreements fully and without delay.
The other thing that we're concerned about is that there are reports that Russian-backed separatists have prevented members of the OSCE special monitoring mission from getting full access to the conflict areas.  There are even some reports that indicate that those separatists have made grave threats against members of the OSCE monitoring team.  So we have seen continued behavior that is in direct violation of the agreement that Russia and the other parties signed just a couple of weeks ago. 
So we continue to be concerned about the situation in Ukraine.  I don't have any updates in terms of assistance that we will provide to the Ukrainians at this point other than to remind you that we have already provided substantial assistance to the Ukrainian military and we have already provided substantial economic assistance to the Ukrainian government and the Ukrainian people.  And there was additional assistance the administration believes we should provide and that is why we have called on the United States Congress to pass legislation that would offer additional loan guarantees to the Ukrainians to strengthen their economy while they try to deal with this continuing instability in the eastern part of the nation.
Cheryl.
Q    Thanks.  Back on DHS, if I may.  Senator McConnell is apparently shopping a compromise on the Hill right now to try to move forward on that.  Is the White House looking to find a compromise, or are you still certain you’ve got to have a clean bill?
MR. EARNEST:  Well, Cheryl, the administration has been clear that we stand ready to compromise with members of Congress, including Republicans, when it comes to trying to address the many problems caused by our broken immigration system.  In fact, we spent a lot of time over the last couple of years trying to reach that compromise, and in the United States Senate, we succeeded in doing so, that we got more than a dozen Republican senators to sign on to a compromise bipartisan immigration reform proposal.  That was a proposal that was blocked by House Republicans, even though we knew that had the House Republican leadership allowed it to come to the floor, it would have passed with bipartisan support.
So we do stand ready to have those kinds of conversations with members of Congress.  But we shouldn’t compromise our homeland security just because Republicans want to pick a political fight.  That certainly is not responsible.  It’s not consistent with the Senate Majority Leader’s aspirations to send a signal to the American people that Republican leadership shouldn’t be “scary -- that’s his word, not mine. 
So we’re hopeful that Republicans will do the responsible thing, that they’ll join with Democrats to support a full-year extension of funding for the Department of Homeland Security prior to the deadline.  And then if there are Republicans that want to have a legitimate conversation with the administration about how to solve the problems that are created by our broken immigration system, then we stand ready to do that.  We’d even host those meetings right here at the White House if they would like.
Fred.
Q    Thanks.  As far as the meeting today with the leader of Qatar, there are reports that Qatar has lent support to Hamas in the past.  Do you think there’s an issue with the President meeting with the leader of Qatar while not meeting with the leader of Israel?
MR. EARNEST:  Well, Fred, I can tell you that -- let me say a couple things about that.  As it relates to Prime Minister Netanyahu, as we’ve said this many times, there is no foreign leader with whom the President has spent more time than Prime Minister Netanyahu.  And that is a testament to the deep and ongoing security relationship that exists between the United States and Israel.  Prime Minister Netanyahu himself has said that the level of security coordination between the United States and Israel under the leadership of President Obama is unprecedented, and we certainly would share that assessment.
As it relates to the leader of Qatar, I can tell you that there are a number of important interests that we share with Qatar.  Like all partnerships, especially in this region of the world, the United States does not necessarily agree with the Qatari government on every issue, but we have the kind of relationship that allows us to be frank and open about where we disagree and why.  But the bottom line is that our interests with Qatar converge somewhat more often than they actually diverge; that Qatar has been a significant help on a range of regional issues, including Afghanistan, Iran.  As you know, the Qataris have even agreed to host a regional training site for the moderate Syrian opposition.  So we certainly welcome the efforts of the Qataris to participate in this broad international coalition to degrade and ultimately destroy ISIL. 
We also know that the Qataris have indicated a willingness to work closely with us in other aspects of our strategy against ISIL, too, particularly as it relates to terror financing.  And this is a focal point of the administration’s efforts to shut down terrorism across the globe, but it certainly is an important part of our strategy for degrading and ultimately destroying ISIL -- that if we can shut off the financing of their operations, we’re going to add even further strain to their ability to carry out the terrible things that we’ve seen them do.  So we’re working closely with the Qataris on that aspect of our strategy, too.  And I think that is precisely why the President convened the meeting with him in the Oval Office today.
Michelle.
Q    On the same subject, do you acknowledge that Qatar has been a significant source of especially private donations to ISIS and other terrorist groups?
MR. EARNEST:  Well, Michelle, what we acknowledge is that there are areas where we disagree with the Qataris, but more often we find that our interests overlap, that our interests with the Qataris are consistent.  And whether it’s our work with the international community to try to ease the international community’s concerns about Iran’s nuclear program, to dealing with the situation in Afghanistan, or even the ongoing campaign against ISIL, that there are a variety of ways in which the United States has been able to work effectively with the Qataris to protect and advance our national security interests in the region and around the globe.
Q    And for a long time, the Qataris have been accused of trying to play it both ways -- of welcoming hate preachers, as we might call them, to their biggest mosque, of continuing the financing, and only really trying to stop it when pressure is put on.  So can you say whether pressure is on them now to stop that financing and whether there has been any progress either in that area or with supporting these people that come in and preach against Jews and other faiths?
MR. EARNEST:  Well, Michelle, I can tell you that the administration does continue to work closely with the Qataris to try to improve our efforts to shut down the financing for terror operations.  And the Qataris have been an effective partner in that endeavor so far, but we do believe that there is more that they can do and more that we can do together to shut down the financing of terror operations around the globe.
Q    And was that made clear today to them, that they can do more?
MR. EARNEST:  Well, I don’t have a detailed readout of the meeting.  It just ended.  But you can check with my NSC colleagues to see if you can get a better sense of how this issue was discussed in the meeting.
Q    And shortly after the video came out of the burning of the Jordanian pilot, it was said that this could be a way to bring in more of the Arab participation.  Do you anticipate that happening?  Because really it’s only been about 3 percent of the airstrikes have come from Arab partners and other countries.  Do you see that growing?  It just seems like it hasn’t changed for the duration of this.
MR. EARNEST:  Well, Michelle, I think there are a lot of different ways to evaluate this, and certainly the easiest way to evaluate this is to take a close look at the way in which Arab countries have participated in our military operations against ISIL.  And as we pointed out on a number of occasions, there are important Arab partners who are taking action alongside American military pilots to strike ISIL targets in Syria.  And we certainly welcome that contribution and it is making a tangible contribution to our ongoing effort and to our broader strategy. 
There also was an important role for them, for our partners in the region, to play when it comes to shutting down ISIL financing; that there is a lot of money that’s moving through that region -- whether it’s the black market for oil to other sources of illicit financing for their operations.
We’re also working with the Qataris and other regional partners to combat ISIL’s efforts to move foreign fighters into that region.  You’ll recall that the President convened a meeting of the United Nations Security Council to discuss this important issue last fall.  We continue to work with our partners around the globe and in the region on those efforts.  And we also work with Muslim leaders in the region to try to counter the extremist ideology that ISIL propagated on social media; that there is an important role for more moderate voices in the Muslim world to stand up and to use their influence to try to counter that messaging.  And we certainly welcome the influence of political leaders in that effort as well.
Q    And really quickly, on Bob McDonald misstating his past service -- does that bother the President or the administration?
MR. EARNEST:  Well, Michelle, I can tell you that, obviously, as you know, Secretary McDonald went to West Point.  He served in the 82nd Airborne.  He is somebody who, when he was in the military, completed jungle, arctic, and desert warfare training.  So he is somebody who understands firsthand the sacrifice that our men and women in uniform make on a regular basis. 
He is also somebody who understands firsthand about why what he said about his service was wrong, and that certainly is why it was appropriate for him to apologize.  But there is no reason to think that the mistake that he made should interfere with his ability to continue to lead the fight for our veterans and to continue to implement the kinds of reforms at the VA that are so critical to making sure that our veterans are getting the benefits that they deserve.
Jon.
Q    A couple of quick follow-ups.  First, yesterday I asked you about whether or not the President would be calling congressional leaders to the White House to try to work out some agreement to prevent the Homeland Security shutdown from happening.  Is that going to happen?
MR. EARNEST:  I don't know of any meeting like that that's planned at this point.  But like I said, I believe that members of Congress are still returning from their week-long recess last week and once they’re all back in town, if it's necessary for the President to bring some of them down to the White House and have a conversation about this, then we'll do that.
Q    Do you think it would be productive given what you just said about how the President has been out of the Senate for a number of years, doesn’t want to get engaged in these questions of procedural --
MR. EARNEST:  I think the point is that it's their responsibility to work this through.  And again, Republicans spent a lot of time trying to persuade the American people that they should be entrusted with the reins of the United States Congress and be entrusted with the power of the purse.  And we need to see if they’re going to step up and assume responsibility.
Again, there are probably going to be some times over the course of this year where Republicans in Congress are going to have to make some really tough decisions and take some really difficult votes.  I'm not really sure why funding the Department of Homeland Security and making sure that that funding doesn’t lapse is considered a difficult task.   But again, this is a challenge for Republican leaders to decide if they can demonstrate to the American public that they’re going to continue to act in the country’s best interests.
Q    On the Iran nuclear talks, you said that the White House is not negotiating for a 10-year sunset, basically, a 10-year -- a point where Iran would be able to become effectively a nuclear power.  Is the administration, is the White House, the President opposed to a timeline that is so short?  You said you're not pushing for it, you're not arguing for it, you're not negotiating for it.  But is that a non-starter?  Is that something you would not agree to?
MR. EARNEST:  Well, again, Jon, I've used this analogy on other occasions, or on other topics.  It's not something that you and I can negotiate from here, that ultimately we're going to have a conversation with the Iranians about the way that they can resolve the international community’s concerns with their nuclear program.
At this point, there’s not more detail that I can share about the negotiating position of the United States other than to say that those reports from earlier today were not accurate and did not accurately reflect our negotiating.
Q    I understand why you wouldn’t want to negotiate it here, obviously, but this seems to be a pretty fundamental question.  The report that you now said was inaccurate, but I'm trying to get how much of -- I don't want to use the word red line, but how much of an absolute non-starter that is.  The report suggested a deal taking place with the Iranians after a period of just 10 years, where it would basically have no restrictions on their ability to enrich uranium.  And I'm just asking if that’s -- I know that's not the position you're trying to get, but is that simply unacceptable?
MR. EARNEST:  Well, what is unacceptable is the idea that Iran would obtain a nuclear weapon.  And that has been our policy for quite some time.  And the whole purpose of these negotiations is to make sure that Iran doesn’t obtain a nuclear weapon.  And the reason for that is that it would be terribly destabilizing for the region.  It could precipitate, and I think we could even say is likely to precipitate a nuclear arms race in what is already a very volatile region of the world.  That would not be in the best interests of American national security, and it certainly would not be in the best interest of our closest ally in the region, Israel. 
So that's why we're engaged in these negotiations.  And once we have -- the President has indicated that the time for conducting these kinds of negotiations is running short, and so once we've sort of reached the other end of these things, we can have a more detailed conversation about what that deal is.
Q    And can you confirm --there was some confusion about the deadline.  Is the deadline for these talks March 24th, as White House officials have suggested in the past, or is it March 31st?
MR. EARNEST:  You mean March 24th or 31st?  I know that it’s  -- I've always heard people say it's the end of the month.  So let me see if I can get back to you with a specific -- if there’s a date certain.
Q    And just one quick thing.  The Republican leaders have said that the President vetoing Keystone would be a political move to please environmental extremists.  What is your response to that?
MR. EARNEST:  Well, the reason the President will veto this legislation that has passed the Congress is that it circumvents a longstanding administrative process for evaluating whether or not infrastructure projects like this are in the best interest of the country.  And it does not represent a specific position on the pipeline itself.  It just merely says that the benefits, the consequences of building that pipeline should be thoroughly evaluated by experts and through this administrative process that has existed for decades and has been used by previous Presidents of both parties to evaluate similar infrastructure projects.  And that's the proper path moving forward, but does not represent a final disposition of the Keystone project.
John.
Q    I know the Vice President and the Secretary of State will be out of town next week during the start of -- actually during the whole AIPAC conference.  Will an administration official be addressing the AIPAC conference at all?
MR. EARNEST:  We'll have more information on that soon.  Obviously we've received an invitation from AIPAC and we'll get back to them.
Q    So we should expect just a name -- it's not whether you're going to have an administration official attend the conference.  It's just a matter of figuring out which administration official actually addresses AIPAC?
MR. EARNEST:  Well, again, I think -- we have received the invitation from AIPAC.  We're considering the invitation.  And once we've made a decision we'll get back to AIPAC about who the speakers will be, and then we'll be in a position to talk about it.
Alexis.
Q    The President has expressed more optimism about bipartisan -- (inaudible.)  Can you explain whether it's just Democrats coming?  Who’s been invited and what the President’s hopes are for that legislation?
MR. EARNEST:  Alexis, I would anticipate that we'll have a list of lawmakers who participate in that meeting.  Both Democrats and Republicans were invited, and I would anticipate that there will be a bipartisan group of members at the meeting. The President, as you point out, does view this as an opportunity for us to find some common ground to move the country forward; that there are some Republicans who have raised similar concerns that the President himself has discussed about our criminal justice system, about reforms that could make our system more consistent with our values of fairness and justice and equality that certainly the President believes are really important, and I know that many of the members -- that all the members who are participating in the meeting also believe are important.
So this is an area that's worthy of careful consideration and consultation because there might be an opportunity for Congress to act in bipartisan fashion with the strong support of the President to put in place reforms to our system that would make our nation more just.  So the President is looking forward to that discussion.  I would anticipate that we'll have, like I said, a list of the members who participate and at least a general overview of that meeting once it concludes.
Q    Josh, yesterday, Governor Fallin, after she met with the National Governors Association, with the President, reported that the President said he was “open to crude exports from the U.S.”  Is that an accurate characterization of what the President told the governors?  And is that sort of a shift in position from what he has previously said?
MR. EARNEST:  I was not in the room when that exchange occurred, so it's hard for me to accurately reflect the way the question was asked and the way it was answered.  What I can do, though, is assure you that the policy of the administration has not changed, that crude oil export regulations are administered by the Department of Commerce.  That’s where these kinds of regulations are considered.  And I don’t have sort of change to announce at this point.
Major.
Q    Following up on Iran, is it the administration’s position that you would want a permanent agreement, one that has no timeline whatsoever, to meet the goal that you said repeatedly, which is to ensure there’s never a development of a nuclear weapon?
MR. EARNEST:  Well, I think what we want is we want an agreement that’s verifiable and we certainly want one that all parties live up to.  And again, in terms of what kind of time constraints are placed in the context of the negotiations and how long people would be signing up, that’s not something I’m going to prejudge or be in a position to talk about from here.  Obviously, this is the subject of ongoing --
Q    -- answer suggests that the administration is open to a timeline of some kind.  It has to be one or the other.
MR. EARNEST:  I recognize that.  I guess what I’m trying to say is I’m just not going to be in a position to talk about the details of our negotiating position with the Iranians.  And the reason for that is simply that we have agreed on the front end with our international partners who are joining us at the table and with the Iranians that we can have an open, candid dialogue in the context of these negotiations with the goal of trying to reach an agreement.  And attempts to try to influence those negotiations by talking about them outside of the context of the negotiations are not going to be helpful to that process.
But my point is, we will have an opportunity at some point, -- on or around the end of March, we’ll have an opportunity to discuss either the framework for an agreement that’s been reached, or we’ll be able to discuss why we were not able to reach an agreement despite the common-sense, reasonable proposal that’s been put forward by the international community.  And your interest in understanding exactly what was put forward is a reasonable one, but one that I can’t discuss right now.
Q    Well, let me just ask you this:  Have you reconciled in your own mind how you could describe to the country an agreement that had a timeline that also met the standard of Iran never obtaining a nuclear weapon?
MR. EARNEST:  Well, again, once --
Q    They’re almost irreconcilable.  Can both be true?
MR. EARNEST:  Well, again, the most important thing is to figure out what exactly Iran will agree to, and understand whether or not --
Q    -- whether or not Iran can obtain a nuclear weapon.
MR. EARNEST:  -- and whether or not it will resolve the international community’s concerns about their efforts to obtain a nuclear weapon.
So that is the focal point of these negotiations.  And again, once we are in a position to evaluate either an agreement that has been reached, or an offer that was made an then rejected by the Iranians, we can talk in more detail about the negotiating position that was assumed by the United States and our international partners, and how it was possible to reconcile that with the policy goals that we have stated, the most important of which you’ve reiterated here, which is to ensure that Iran does not obtain a nuclear weapon.
Q    On Secretary McDonald -- a couple of veterans groups have said they accept his apology, but said it raises questions in their minds about his trustworthiness.  And they don’t talk just about this, but they’ve also made mention of misstatements that the Secretary may have intentionally or unintentionally made about how many people have been fired and held accountable in some of the implementation of reforms.  Is the President satisfied that Secretary McDonald is trustworthy and is, in fact, implementing all of the reforms and legislation he recently signed?
MR. EARNEST:  The President believes that Secretary McDonald has a very difficult task in front of him to try to bring much-needed reforms to the VA.  And this is a task that generations of VA secretaries have tried to accomplish.  Many of them have made progress, and the President is pleased with the progress that Secretary McDonald has made so far.
But again, this is a very difficult challenge.  And the reason that Secretary McDonald has been successful so far is that not only does he bring with him some private sector management experience that I do think is useful when trying to get his arms around a large government agency like this and manage it efficiently, or at least as efficiently as possible, this task also reflects his own personal commitment to these issues that starts with his own military service to our country.  But even after he left military service, Secretary McDonald was committed, even using his free time, to try to support military families, our veterans and their families.  And that’s a testament to his character.  It’s a testament to what drives him, and it’s why he’s well suited for this job.
But I don’t think there’s anybody who sits around -- who wakes up in the morning thinking, boy, my job is really hard today, I wish I could just go walk in Bob McDonald’s shoes because that sure would be a weight off my shoulders.  I think everybody recognizes that he’s a got a very difficult task in front of him.  And that’s why his skill and personal commitment to these issues are so important to his success.
Q    When the VA was in a lot of trouble, the President tasked Rob Nabors to go over and assist.  Is he still there?  Is he still working in carrying out essentially a conduit role from the White House to the VA, and serving as that sort of presidential intermediary or liaison with this new Secretary?
MR. EARNEST:  Rob is still working at the VA and is still providing the Secretary and other members of the senior leadership at the VA the kind of advice and expertise that they continue to benefit from.  So we certainly are pleased to have Rob still serving his country and our veterans over at the VA.
Q    Last question.  Senator McCain raised his concerns about the Choice Card, which is part of the legislation the President signed.  We had a couple of questions at the budget briefing, but it doesn’t appear that every member of Congress is satisfied that this Choice Card is going to be implemented in the budget and the financial flexibility is going to be there for veterans to obtain care outside of the system if they meet the criteria.  Can you assure veterans, from this podium, that, in fact, financing will be there and the Choice Card will be implemented fully as written by Congress?
MR. EARNEST:  Well, I’m not intimately familiar with this issue, so let me take this question for the VA and see if we can provide you some data to help you understand our position on this. 
Q    Josh, thanks.  I want to take you back to Keystone for a moment.  Is there any way in your mind, if the process plays out -- you’ve made the point that this has sort of circumvented longstanding processes -- if they were to play out, in your mind, is there any way the President signs off on the Keystone XL?
MR. EARNEST:  That possibility still does exist.  This is an ongoing review that’s being conducted by the State Department.  They’re going to evaluate the impact that this project would have on the country.  They’re going to have the opportunity to evaluate the impact that this project would have on contributing to climate change.  And it certainly is possible; the President will keep an open mind as the State Department considers the wide range of impacts that this pipeline could have on the country, both positive and negative.  And so we’ll see what happens once the State Department has completed their - what’s called the national interest determination - what essentially is a report evaluating whether or not the completion of this infrastructure project would be in the best interest of the United States of America.
Q    You said as far as Israel was concerned there’s a deep, longstanding security relationship between our country and theirs.  I’m curious, as it relates to the Iranian talks, is it fair to characterize a level of frustration on behalf of the administration to this notion that some people are cherry-picking bits and pieces and maybe as an outside actor attempting to influence the negotiations?
MR. EARNEST:  Well, Kevin, I think you asked about this last week, I believe, where I did express some frustration that we have seen some people take information that they had obtained about the U.S. negotiating position and cherry-pick information to try to distort the public impression of exactly what that negotiating position was.  So that is why, at least, even in the context of the questions that I’ve taken today, that I’ve been loathe to get into the details of the U.S. negotiating position. Everybody will have an opportunity to evaluate that soon enough.
Q    But as the details come out, albeit you’re saying they’re not accurate, you can understand why many perhaps in Israel might say, you see, this is exactly what we were talking about to begin with.
MR. EARNEST:  Well, I think what people around the globe can be confident of is that the United States is negotiating with one clear goal in mind, which is to make sure that Iran does not obtain a nuclear weapon.  And we are working closely with the international community to achieve that goal.  That was the goal of the sanctions regime that Congress passed and this administration implemented in close coordination with our allies around the globe, to compel the Iranians to come to the negotiating table and try to resolve the international community’s concerns with their nuclear program. 
And those talks are underway, and we certainly wouldn’t want anything that I say from here or any other efforts to try to distort our negotiating position to negatively impact our ability to try to bring those negotiations to conclusion in a way that yields a strong and verifiable agreement that’s clearly in the best interest of not just the United States and not just Israel and not just our international negotiating partners, but is clearly in the best interest of the whole country -- or of the whole globe.
Q    Quick housekeeping.  As far as AIPAC is concerned, there is zero chance that someone won’t be going to AIPAC, right?
MR. EARNEST:  Well, again, they have extended an invitation to the administration; once we have decided how we’re going to respond to the invitation, we will let them know.  And then once we let them know, we’ll let all of you know.
Q    But you will accept it, someone is going, right?
Q    Somebody is going, right?
MR. EARNEST:  I hear you.  It does seem just as a matter of common courtesy, it seems like we should respond to their invitation first and then we can talk about it publicly.
Chris.
Q    So you’re not suggesting that no one is going?
MR. EARNEST:  I certainly didn’t come close to saying that.
Q    Yes, you did.  (Laughter.)
Q    I want to ask a question a different way.  Given the President is going to make obviously the final call on XL, is there no communication between the White House and State Department about when you might expect their report?
MR. EARNEST:  Well, I don’t know -- I can’t account for every single conversation that occurs between the White House and the State Department.  I think it’s certainly possible that somebody in the White House has gotten an update in terms of how much longer it would take the State Department to compete their review, but I’m not aware of those conversations.  But even if I were, I’m not sure I’d be in a position to announce for the State Department what their timeline is going to be.  If they’re prepared to announce a timeline then they’ll announce it.
Q    As you know, there are a lot of people anxious about this.  They waited six years and there are others who are concerned about a political implication for 2016 depending on when the President does make his decision.  Is the expectation that once the State Department report comes out, the President will make a decision fairly quickly?  Does he feel like he needs to do that quickly?
MR. EARNEST:  Well, I wouldn’t want to prejudge the outcome here, but I would anticipate that once the review has been completed that there would not be a significant delay in announcing the results of that review and ultimately making a decision on this project.
Q    But on DHS, as you know, there are critics who have suggested that the White House has overstated the potential impact if there’s a delay in funding, saying that because everyone who is essential will still be working that it won’t make a significant difference to national security.  The White House’s -- you and others have said that obviously an impact would occur.  And we heard from some people, including the FEMA Director yesterday, about what that would be.  So given that, what kind of preparations are underway for a possible shutdown? And is the White House confident that DHS is ready, should that occur?
MR. EARNEST:  Well, Chris, I can tell you that it’s not just the administration who is making the case that shutting down the Department of Homeland Security would have a bad impact on national security.  I know that Congressman Peter King was on television today making exactly that case.  So he doesn’t often agree with the administration, but at least in this case he’s making the same case that we are.  He’s not the only one who’s making that case.
I do know that the Department of Homeland Security has been engaged in a planning process to ensure they are prepared and can take the steps necessary to try to mitigate the impact of a shutdown of that department.  But as I’ve mentioned before, the impact of that shutdown will include tens of thousands of Homeland Security personnel being furloughed.  It will include many Homeland Security officers showing up for work to protect their country but not getting a paycheck on time.  And that doesn’t seem particularly fair, and I’m not sure why anybody thinks that would be a good outcome for the country.
So we’ve been clear that this is not a good thing.  But DHS is doing the responsible thing, which is, even as they try to talk to members of Congress and encourage them to fulfill their responsibility and pass a budget, they’re also engaged in the planning to try to mitigate the potential impact of shutting down their agency.
Q    Can you give us a sense of what’s involved in that planning?
MR. EARNEST:  I can’t, but they probably can.
Yes, sir.
Q    A couple questions, Josh.  A few days ago, a Mexican citizen was killed by two police officers in Pasco, Washington.  Is the President aware of the incident?  Or the White House?  What’s his reaction to that?
MR. EARNEST:  Can you say it one more time?
Q    A Mexican citizen was killed in Pasco, Washington, the state of Washington.  My question was, was the President aware of the incident, or the White House, and what is the reaction to that?
MR. EARNEST:  I’ve certainly seen the news reports.  I haven’t talked to the President about it.  I don’t know if he is aware, although knowing he’s an avid consumer of news, I assume that he is.  But I don’t know a lot of the details of the case beyond what I’ve read in news reports.  So for questions about sort of where that investigation stands, I’d refer you to the local authorities there.
Mara.
Q    I have a question about Ukraine.  You said earlier that you continue to be concerned by these violations.  And the President said when Merkel was visiting that if Russia continued to do this he would seriously consider sending arms to the Ukrainian government and also possibly increasing the sanctions. So you’re seeing these violations.  Now what are you going to do?
MR. EARNEST:  Well, what we’re doing right now is we’re continuing to support the ongoing efforts to try to implement this agreement.  And I know that there was a call that was scheduled among the foreign ministerial level of the four groups that have been involved in these negotiations -- the Russians, the Ukrainians, the French and the Germans --
Q    Today?
MR. EARNEST:  I believe that was yesterday -- I don’t know if it was yesterday or today, but I know that those efforts are ongoing and we continue to support them.  And the consequences that you cited of failing to live up to those kinds of commitments continue to be on the table.  So we’re going to continue to closely watch the situation with the President, the Vice President, and other senior members of the team, continue to be in close touch with our partners who are working this situation and we’re going to monitor it closely.  But certainly there is the potential of offering additional assistance to the Ukrainian military or ramping up our sanctions regime against the Russians.
Q    Look, right now they’re violating it.  How long will they go on violating it until you do something?  I’m just wondering, how long do you give this process?  I mean, they’re not living up to it now.  You’re monitoring it.  How long are you going to monitor the violations before you do something?
MR. EARNEST:  We’ll we’re going to continue to try to work diplomatically to resolve this situation.  And that has been our approach from the beginning, which is that it is our view that the only way we’re going to resolve this is not with a military solution but with a diplomatic solution.  And that is why we’re continuing to press that option.
But, you’re right, at some point you have to start considering some other alternatives, which is why the United States has already provided substantial military assistance to the Ukrainian military.  It’s why we’ve already worked with our partners in Europe to put in place a sanctions regime and isolate President Putin and -- or Russian political leadership.  And that was a response to their earlier violations of generally accepted international norms.
But, yes, the potential of increasing our assistance to Ukraine and increasing the costs that are sustained by Russia has the potential to be implemented.  But we’re going to continue to watch this and make decisions accordingly.
Q    Well, is it also possible that these violations could continue and you decide to do nothing else?
MR. EARNEST:  Well, I think our level of pessimism is not quite that high, but we’ll --
Q    You say there’s the potential that you might do something else. 
MR. EARNEST:  That’s right.
Q    I’m just wondering, if the violations continue, might you also decide that it’s not worth doing anything else on sanctions?
MR. EARNEST:  Based on our past response to Russia’s provocations and failure to live up to generally accepted international principles, I think you could rightly conclude that it’s unlikely that that is the outcome.  But as we see Russia continue to destabilize eastern Ukraine and continue to take steps that are clearly in violation of agreements that they’ve signed, that the risk of further sanctions only increases.
Mark.
Q    Josh, I want to come back to Iran one more time.  I just want to be clear about what you’re denying.  You’re denying that the United States has proposed a 10-year agreement, is that right?
MR. EARNEST:  My understanding of the reports -- that I will confess that I have not seen firsthand -- but my understanding of the reports indicate that -- they wrongly indicate that the agreement that’s being negotiated right now will be 10 years in length, and that’s not our negotiating position at all.
Q    But you’re not denying that there is some substantially longer agreement of which there is a 10-year opening phase to it, right?
MR. EARNEST:  Well, what I’m reluctant to do is to sort of wade in on a detailed assessment of where the negotiations currently stand.
Q    I’m not asking for details.  Just are you denying something longer?
MR. EARNEST:  That’s certainly more detail than we’ve talked about so far.  But again, we will have an opportunity in the coming weeks to consider either to evaluate an agreement that’s been reached, or to evaluate an agreement that the Iranians walked away from.  But suffice it to say the United States continues to negotiate from the position that there should be an opportunity for the Iranians to ease the international community’s concerns about their nuclear program to, in a verifiable way, make clear to the international community that they will not acquire a nuclear weapon. 
The Iranians have said many times that that is consistent with their view and with their national policy.  It’s the view of the international community that they just need to be able to verify that for the international community.  And ultimately, if we can come to an agreement around those outlines that would be a good outcome for not just the United States and Israel, but it would be good for the world.
Q    Can we follow on this?
MR. EARNEST:  Go ahead, Connie.
Q    At this point, would you still call on Prime Minister Netanyahu to cancel the speech before the Congress?  And if so, would the President meet with Netanyahu?
MR. EARNEST:  Connie, we have not called on Prime Minister Netanyahu to cancel his speech.  And we’ve indicated the reason that the President will not meet with him during this visit to the United States is that it comes just two weeks before his election.  And in order to avoid even the appearance of interfering with a democratic election in another country, the President will not meet with the Prime Minister.  But I would anticipate that at some point after the elections, regardless of who wins, that the President will convene a meeting with the leader of Israel and will continue the very close coordination on security issues that has characterized his relationship thus far with Prime Minister Netanyahu.
JC.
Q    As the United States and her allies try to come to an agreement with Iran about its nuclear ambitions, what is this administration doing -- how is it engaged to reduce nuclear weapons in nations that actually do have these weapons, like China and North Korea, Russia, Pakistan, et cetera?
MR. EARNEST:  Well, JC, the President -- I think each of those situations is a little bit different.  But we certainly have even worked closely with Russia to reduce our nuclear stockpile, and this is something that the President did early in his tenure.  And that, he believes, is in the best interest of not just U.S. national security, but also the safety of citizens and people around the globe.  But, certainly, we continue to be focused on these issues.
Q    Last Friday, a federal judge appointed by President Obama issued an injunction on a separate immigration executive action, specifically stopping the detention of migrants coming across the border in Texas.  Is the Department of Justice going to seek a stay of this injunction in the same way they are seeking a stay --
MR. EARNEST:  I’d encourage you to check with DOJ about sort of the next step in that legal process.  I do know that the issue in question in that legal proceeding was related to our efforts to address what at the time was a rather urgent situation that we saw a substantial number of unaccompanied minors at the southern border attempting to illegally enter the United States of America.  And one of our efforts to try to respond to that situation was to detain recent border-crossers near the border, and to try to find an environment in which families could be detained together, and to try to make sure that we’re doing that in the most humane way possible.
So I know that there are some who raised concerns about that policy, but that is what the administration believed was an appropriate way to respond to that urgent situation.
Since that time, we have seen the numbers of undocumented immigrants, particularly unaccompanied minors, in that sector of the border decline substantially.  And that’s thanks to the comprehensive strategy that this administration has put in place, working with Central American countries, working with our partners in Mexico, and stepping up some of our law enforcement capabilities on the border to try to address the situation.  And that situation has -- or at least the urgency of the situation down there has subsided dramatically.
Q    -- your administration argued that this detention served as a deterrent to make sure that wasn’t another ongoing flood of migrants.  That’s part of the comprehensive strategy you just mentioned.  Is the administration at all concerned now that this deterrent is gone, that you’ll see another wave of migrants?
MR. EARNEST:  Well, it certainly wasn’t the only deterrent. I think the most effective deterrent that we have is to have the President of the United States making very clear that people in Central America should not send their kids on this very dangerous journey; that too often, we saw reports of kids who didn’t complete the journey safely, that they were killed.  This is a very dangerous trek.  In some cases, we saw the kids were actually funneled into human trafficking rings. 
So we’ve continued to make the case very clearly and very publicly that parents should not even contemplate to putting their kids in the hands of human traffickers in trying to move them into the United States illegally.  So we’ve been really clear about that, and that is probably the most effective deterrent that we have.  But to the extent that other things can also deter and reinforce that message, we obviously want to support them.
Q    The Congressional Budget Office sent a letter to Thad Cochran, scoring the President’s executive actions for DACA and DAPA, and it found that his executive actions would actually increase budget deficits by $8.8 billion over the next 10 years. I was wondering if you could square that CBO finding with the President’s budget, which claims immigration reform and executive actions would reduce the budget.
MR. EARNEST:  We may have to follow up with you on this,  because my reading of that report was actually that removing the executive actions would actually add $8 billion to the deficit.
Q    Off-budget, you're right.  That's if we don't consider -- that's if the payroll taxes from the DAPA and DACA recipients didn't go to the Social Security trust fund.  But if the Social Security trust fund exists, if those payroll taxes are going to the Social Security trust fund, then that CBO letter found that the immigration actions do add to the deficit by $8.8 billion over the next 10 years.
MR. EARNEST:  Well, I may have somebody who is more steeped in the budgetary details.  My understanding is that this would have a positive impact on our deficit precisely because for the first time what we’d be doing is we’d be bringing people out of the shadows and actually making them pay taxes.  That would be a good thing for the life of Social Security.  It would be a good thing for our economy.  And ultimately, it would be a good thing for the deficit.  But we can have somebody follow up with you on your -- on what may be a more detailed question.
Q    Thank you very much.
MR. EARNEST:  Mark.
Q    Josh, back on Keystone, does President Obama believe that 2,300 days is a reasonable length of time for the State Department to conduct an evaluation?
MR. EARNEST:  Well, I think it’s certainly fair to suggest that the State Department is conducting an in-depth review.  (Laughter.)  The other thing that is also true is that there have been some legal proceedings that have interfered with the completion of this review.  There was this long-running court case in Nebraska about the proper route of the pipeline.  And that certainly did impact the State Department’s ability to evaluate the route of the pipeline since it wasn’t finalized and was subject to this ultimate court ruling.
But within just the last few weeks the Nebraska court has issued a decision that has finalized the proposal, and now that final proposal can be evaluated by the State Department.  That's what they're doing right now.
Q    Can you imagine what he would say if he gave you an assignment and you said, I’ll get back to you in 2,300 days?  (Laughter.)
MR. EARNEST:  I can't.  (Laughter.)  I can't.
Goyal.
Q    Thank you.
MR. EARNEST:  I’ll give you the last one, Goyal.
Q    Two questions here.  One, when last year Prime Minister Modi came to the United States, late last year -- and including at the United Nations and at the White House, at the U.N. he announced that India should be a member of the U.N. Security Council, and which President in India also announced and endorsed.  What is happening with that membership?
And also Prime Minister Modi addressed in Washington the U.S.-India Business Council and calling on the Fortune 500 companies make in India, which will create thousands of jobs in the U.S. and thousands of jobs in India.  So what’s happening with that issue?  And the two leaders also set up a hotline.  The two have spoken ever since his visit to the White House?
MR. EARNEST:  Goyal, I can tell you as it relates to India’s membership on the Security Council, I know the President endorsed them acceding to the Security Council in the context of a variety of other important reforms to the operations of the United Nations.  I don't have an update for you on the status of those ongoing reforms, or at least efforts to try to bring about some of those reforms.  But I’m sure my colleagues in Ambassador Power’s office can give you some additional information on this.
Goyal, the President often discusses his view that we need to have more products that are stamped with Made in America and that that would be good for the U.S. economy.  It would be good for job creation.  The President also does believe that, as Indian consumers have the opportunity to buy American goods, that it could be good for the Indian economy, as well. 
So the President did have the opportunity to discuss some of these economic issues and our trade relationship with India.  In the context of his visit to India just last month, the President spent a lot of time with Prime Minister Modi and they spent a lot of time talking about some of these economic issues.
You’ll recall that there was a CEO summit in the context of those meeting, and that there were American and Indian business leaders that spent some time talking through some of these issues.  And the President himself had the opportunity to sit down at a roundtable with a couple dozen of them and talk about some of the challenges that they face as they try to do more business together in a way that benefits the economies and job creation in both countries.
So there is an opportunity for us to try to advance the interests of both our countries by working together and by coordinating our efforts.  And the President is certainly committed to that, again, in part, because the substantial economic benefits that could be enjoyed by the American people.  And that ultimately is his goal.
I know that Prime Minister Modi has a similar interest.  And I don't know of any recent conversations that they have had, but that continues to be a priority of both the President and his administration.
Q    Second, Josh, as far as the immigration is concerned, when President issued executive order millions of people were happy in that they will come out of the shadow.  Now they're confused.  What message you think President has for them?  They are waiting to come out of the shadow and apply for their status.
MR. EARNEST:  Well, Goyal, this is something that we are concerned about.  The President does believe and we have said on many occasions that we believe that there is a very clear precedent for the executive actions the President announced at the end of last year; that taking executive action to try to address some elements of our broken immigration system is consistent with the way that Presidents of both parties for several decades have used their executive authority.
And there is no doubt that these kinds of changes would be good for our economy, would be good for job creation, and would be good for bringing about greater accountability to our immigration system.  And that ultimately is what the President believes is the benefit here -- that we can bring millions of people out of the shadows, that we can make them submit to a background check, that they will pay taxes, and that they can also get a work permit and they can start contributing to this country in a way that doesn't require them to live in fear of being deported at a moment’s notice and separated from their families.
Now, this, of course, does not apply to people who have recently crossed the border.  In fact, we want to focus our enforcement efforts on people who have recently crossed the border and on others who may pose a threat to community safety or national security.  But that is the crux of this debate, and we're going to continue to move this through the legal process because we're confident that the strongest legal arguments around on our side.
Thanks, everybody.
END

	2:13 P.M. EST
The White House
Office of the Press Secretary
James S. Brady Press Briefing Room
12:55 P.M. EST
MR. EARNEST:  Good afternoon, everybody.  I apologize for the delayed start to today’s briefing.  Let’s go right to your questions. 
Nancy, do you want to get us started?  Nice to see you today. 
Q    Josh, with time running out on the DHS deadline, is it time for the President to get more directly involved?
MR. EARNEST:  Well, Nancy, right now it seems to be an agreement -- a disagreement, actually -- principally between the Republican leader of the House and the Republican leader of the United States Senate.  And again, Republicans made an aggressive case over the course of last year about why the American people should entrust the United States Congress to Republican leadership.  And here we are, seven or eight weeks into their tenure, and they’re on the precipice of falling down on the job. Particularly when -- and that’s notable when we’re talking about something as important as funding the Department of Homeland Security. 
So the President remains engaged.  The President is ready to take phone calls as necessary.  But right now, this is not a partisan dispute; this is a party dispute among leaders in the Republican Party.  Unfortunately, the people who stand to lose the most from it are the American people. 
Q    Does the President -- is he willing to accept a CR if this doesn’t get resolved?
MR. EARNEST:  Well, right now there’s no reason that this shouldn’t get resolved.  What’s being considered by the United States Senate is a piece of legislation that would fund the Department of Homeland Security through the remainder of this fiscal year.  It would not include any ideological or politically motivated riders, but it would reflect the bipartisan compromise about appropriate funding levels for that agency. 
I'm routinely loathe to make predictions about what’s going to happen when it comes to Congress.  But right now, I think everybody expects that that piece of legislation, once it actually comes up for a vote, will get bipartisan support.  And so the question then will be whether or not the Speaker of the House is going to put it on the floor.  Because, again, we know that if that piece of legislation that passes the Senate with bipartisan support is put on the floor of the House of Representatives, it would also pass with bipartisan support. 
So the question right now is a question for senators in both parties as they consider that piece of legislation.  I think we have an expectation about what that outcome is going to be.  Then the question I think will rest with the Speaker of the House.  And if it's necessary for the President to speak to him directly about how important it is to fund the Department of Homeland Security, he’ll have that conversation.  But I would anticipate that the Speaker of the House understands the stakes of this action.  And we’re hopeful that he will take the responsible course and allow that bipartisan bill that would fund the agency for the remainder of this year, to come up for a vote and pass the House of Representatives.
Q    And then I just have one question on Israel.  Is the decision to send Susan Rice and Samantha Power to AIPAC this weekend, is that sort of an effort to kind of dial down the rhetoric that’s just been getting hotter and hotter on both sides?
MR. EARNEST:  Well, Nancy, I think the participation of Ambassador Power and National Security Advisor Rice is consistent with the kind of administration participation you’ve seen in previous AIPAC conferences.  The President’s spoke a couple of times over the course of his tenure in the White House.  I know the Vice President has spoken over there at least once during that conference.  But it's not at all uncommon for senior administration officials to also speak at that conference, and that’s what will happen this year.
And certainly if it's perceived by some as an effort to demonstrate bipartisan support for the relationship between the United States and Israel, then that would be great.  That would be a great conclusion.  That certainly is the kind of investment that has characterized this administration’s management of that relationship. 
Unfortunately, that’s not the way that everyone has participated in this dispute over the last several weeks.  And we are hopeful that we can get back to a place where the national security of the United States, most importantly, but also the national security of Israel, can be enhanced by ensuring that our relationship is not subjected to partisan turbulence. 
Jeff. 
Q    Josh, what role did the U.S. play in the un-masking of so-called Jihadi John?
MR. EARNEST:  Well, I have seen those reports over the course of today and I know that there are some media outlets that are reporting that this suspect has been identified.  What I can tell you is that the United States government continues to aggressively investigate the individuals who are responsible for the murder of American citizens.  And at this point, I'm not in a position to either confirm or deny that the individual named in these reports is the individual that we're searching for.  But I can tell you that the United States’ commitment and the President’s commitment to ensuring that we find and hold accountable the terrorists who are responsible for the murders of American citizens has never been stronger.
And we will continue to work closely with our partners around the globe, including the British government, to ensure that these terrorists are brought to justice.
Q    Can you describe that relationship with the British government in terms of finding this particular individual, which side was more active or more successful?
MR. EARNEST:  Well, I can just say as a general matter, Jeff, that, as you know, there is a special relationship that exists between the United States and the United Kingdom that characterizes our conversations on a wide variety of areas, but it certainly applies to the area of national security.  And there are extensive law enforcement and intelligence resources that have been shared between our two countries as we search for the individuals who are responsible for the murder of both U.S. citizens and some British citizens as well.
So this is something that we continue to be focused on and it continues to be a priority.
Q    And on one other national security issue -- Secretary Kerry said on Saturday that the President will be making decisions in the next few days about Ukraine and other steps with regard to sanctions or defensive arms.  Can you give us an update on his thinking and when you expect a decision to be made?
MR. EARNEST:  Jeff, I don't have a specific update in terms of the President’s thinking.  Obviously over the last several weeks, we have seen negotiators from France and Germany and Ukraine and Russia convene to try to find a diplomatic resolution to the escalating conflict in eastern Ukraine.  We have expressed concern about the tendency of the Russians to pretty flagrantly violate the terms of an agreement that they had just signed.  That does put the Russians at greater risk of isolation and of additional costs being imposed upon them by the international community
I can tell you that the President’s National Security Advisor, Susan Rice, is convening a meeting today with her counterparts in Italy, France, the UK, and Germany to discuss this issue further.  All of these countries have both observed the continued Russian escalation of the situation.  They also have been an important part of coordinating the effort to impose costs on Russia.  So these kinds of discussions between the United States and our counterparts are timely.  And I would anticipate we'll have at least some kind of readout of that meeting later today.
Q    Should we anticipate that that meeting is a next step in another set of sanctions against Russia?
MR. EARNEST:  Well, I think you should just -- let me say it this way.  It is not uncommon for the United States and members of the President’s national security team to be in regular touch with our close allies, including the four that I just named here. It is notable that we're convening sort of a group meeting, if you will.  But I don't have any advance readout of decisions that may or may not be made in the context of that meeting.
Olivier.
Q    Josh, a couple for you.  One is, will Susan Rice and Samantha Power have a specific way to rebut Prime Minister Netanyahu’s arguments against an Iran nuclear deal?
MR. EARNEST:  Well, I don't have a specific preview of their remarks.  I'm not sure of the status of Ambassador Power’s remarks, but I know that Dr. Rice’s remarks are still being written at this point.  But I can tell you that, as previous administration officials have done at previous AIPAC conferences, it's an opportunity to demonstrate once again the commitment of this administration and of this country to close security cooperation with Israel. 
Prime Minister Netanyahu himself has observed that the security cooperation between the Netanyahu administration and the Obama administration is unprecedented.  He meant that as a compliment, in a positive way.  And I would expect that that’s something you would hear Ambassador Power and Dr. Rice reiterate in the context of their remarks. 
I also would anticipate that you would hear them talk at least a little bit about why the administration believes that it serves the national security interests of the United States and of Israel to try to resolve the international community’s concerns about Iran’s nuclear program diplomatically.  But for a more detailed preview, that may be something that we can provide at a later date.
Q    And then, on an unrelated note, Senator Menendez has written a letter to the administration, asking -- or insisting, rather, that before you take Cuba off the list of state sponsors of terrorism, if you do, that the administration address the fate of a number of fugitives from U.S. justice.  And I’m wondering whether, as a matter of principle, the President believes that, in fact, those fugitives should be turned back over to the United States in the context of these negotiations.
MR. EARNEST:  Well, Olivier, I’ve heard about the letter; I haven't read the details of it.  I can tell you that when the President announced at the end of last year that he was prepared to move toward normalizing relations between the United States and Cuba, it was part of an effort to change our strategy in terms of the way the United States has pressured the Cuban government to protect and advance the basic human rights of their citizens.  And part of that process was reviewing Cuba’s status on the list of state sponsors of terrorism. 
But essentially, these are two separate processes.  There is a process between Diplomats of the United States and Cuba, where they’re talking about normalizing relations between our two countries and reestablishing diplomatic ties.  This review process about Cuba’s status on the state sponsor of terror list is a separate process, but it’s one that’s being driven by the State Department and it’s one that’s ongoing.
I would draw a bit of a distinction between terrorists and those who supports terrorism around the globe and people who are wanted by the United States of America.  They aren’t always the same. 
Cheryl.
Q    Thanks.  One of the administration’s priorities this year has been passage of trade promotion authority.  But I’m wondering -- and I know that some of the Cabinet secretaries have been out talking about it -- can you say how close you are to getting the votes to passage of that in Congress.
MR. EARNEST:  Well, as I mentioned at the top, I am always loathe to make predictions about the speed and efficiency of the United States Congress.  It’s not uncommon for them to not meet those expectations.  But I can tell you that this is a process that the administration remains committed to, and it’s a process that we remain committed to advancing in bipartisan fashion.  We know that this is a top priority of many Republicans in the United States Congress. 
There are some Democrats who believe that this is a worthy endeavor, and certainly those Democrats take heart in knowing that the President is committed to agreements that strengthen the standing and expand the opportunity of middle-class families in the United States.
So the President has pretty high standards when it comes to considering agreements like this.  There is no doubt, however, that rising U.S. exports have contributed significantly to our country’s economic strength; that throughout the economic recovery, since the worst downturn since the Great Depression, increasing exports have contributed to nearly one-third of our overall economic growth.  We’ve also seen that exports have increased by roughly 50 percent since 2009, and between 2009 and 2013, exports have supported an additional 1.6 million U.S. jobs.

	So there are a variety of metrics that indicate how good trade agreements that open up opportunities in overseas markets for American goods and services is good for the U.S. economy. 
That’s the reason that the President would be pursuing an agreement along these lines.  And we’re going to need to work with Democrats and Republicans in Congress to try to make some progress on that.  The good news is that I know that there are some Republicans who agree with the President when he says that.

	So we’re going to try to capitalize on that possible area of common ground in an attempt to work with Democrats and Republicans to try to advance this through the Congress.
Bill.
Q    Even though you won’t say whether -- you won’t address the name of the so-called “Jihadi John,” does the U.S. government know the name?
MR. EARNEST:  Well, if you will recall, Bill, I guess it was the end of last year, I believe, that the FBI Director, Jim Comey, had indicated that investigators had zeroed in on an individual, based on the careful coordination and investigative work that has been conducted alongside our British allies.  But whether or not the person that’s named in those news reports is the person in question is something that I can neither confirm, nor deny.
Q    In terms of the bigger question, though, there are thousands of people who have reportedly left the Western world, and hundreds certainly from the United States, to fight in service of ISIS.  How is it possible to keep track of these people?  Do you have resources to even do that?
MR. EARNEST:  Well, there’s no doubt that the challenge that you’re raising is a significant one and one that the President and other world leaders have identified as a risk.  Now, I believe that the latest assessment as it relates to U.S. citizens is about 100 or 150 individuals who have either traveled or attempted to travel to that region of the world to lend support to ISIL.  But the numbers, when you consider people across the globe, we’re talking about people who have traveled from more than 90 countries and upwards of 20,000 people.  So this is a significant challenge, and it’s a challenge to which we have devoted significant resources. 
There is an effort -- I guess the best illustration of this is, as you’ll recall, the President convened the U.N. Security Council last fall -- only the second time a U.S. President has ever done that -- to talk about this precise issue, about what the international community can do to improve our coordination as we fight and mitigate the threat that is posed by foreign fighters. 
And we’re using significant law enforcement resources -- INTERPOL, obviously significant intelligence resources are dedicated to this; there are important homeland security resources that are involved.  But this is a risk and a challenge, and one that we are working very hard to mitigate.
Q    Can the U.S. follow each of the people, those who have left these shores? 
MR. EARNEST:  Well, I’d refer you to our national security experts in terms of how exactly we mitigate this threat.  There are a variety of ways that we do exactly that.  And one of those ways is to do our best to monitor the movements of individuals that may have traveled to the region and may be seeking to use their Western passport to travel back.  We’re cognizant of that.
The other thing that we are also aware of is trying to prevent people from going in the first place.  And that was part of what we talked about at the Countering Violent Extremism Summit here at the White House last week.  But this is part of an ongoing effort to try to prevent people from even going in the first place, and there are significant DHS resources that we can use to do that.
Q    But the basic question is, can you monitor them all?
MR. EARNEST:  Well, obviously, we’re talking about 20,000 people, and there are a variety of ways that we can counter and mitigate the threat that they pose to the United States and the West, and we’re working very aggressively to do that.
Jim.
Q    Josh, does the naming of Jihadi John help or hurt the effort to capture or kill him?
MR. EARNEST:  Well, that may be a question that’s better posed to our law enforcement and national security officials who are responsible for bringing that individual to justice.  And we are focused on making sure that the terrorists who are responsible for the killing of these innocent Americans are brought to justice. 
But as it relates, again, to these specific reports, I can neither confirm nor deny their accuracy.
Q    But the United States, does it have a position on whether or not he should be named?  Does it help in finding him or hurt in finding him?  Can you answer that?
MR. EARNEST:  Well, I have not seen a specific request necessarily from this government and I don’t believe there’s been one from the British government -- well, let me say it this way. I do think that you can infer from the fact that neither the U.S. government, nor the British government is confirming the identity of this individual or the accuracy of these reports is an indication that the investigation is one that we are pursuing rather aggressively.  And over the last several months, at least, our investigators have found it to their advantage to not talk publicly about the details or progress of that investigation.
But again, as it relates to these reports and their veracity, I can’t confirm or deny them.
Q    On another subject then, Cuba.  The second round of negotiations begins tomorrow here in Washington, D.C.  What do you expect to be accomplished?  Will there be deliverables?  Will, in fact, embassies be reopened soon?
MR. EARNEST:  Jim, it’s correct that tomorrow, Friday, February 27th, the United States will host a delegation from the Cuban government to discuss reestablishing diplomatic relations. The delegation for the United States will be led by Assistant Secretary of State for Western Hemisphere Affairs, Roberta Jacobson.  The Cuban delegation will be led by Josefina Vidal, who’s the Director-General of the U.S. Division of the Ministry of Foreign Affairs.  These talks continue the dialogue that was initiated by the parties on January 22nd in Havana.  These talks also represent a key step in implementing the new direction
During the talks in Havana, the parties identified a set of issues that need to be addressed as we reestablish diplomatic relations between our countries.  We discussed, among other things, the opening of embassies in our respective countries, and stated our expectation that the U.S. embassy in Havana and the Cuban embassy in Washington will operate the way diplomatic missions do throughout the world.  And we look forward to building upon our previous conversations and beginning ways to address these issues that we have identified.
Q    Do you expect that they’ll be successful this week?
MR. EARNEST:  Well, certainly these kinds of diplomatic exchanges represent an effort to try to propel our relationship forward.  And again, the President was very clear that it does reflect a new strategy that we’re pursuing.  The previous strategy, one that had been pursued for more than 50 years, was to try to isolate Cuba and to try to use that isolation as pressure on them to change the way they treat their citizens.  For 50 years, that strategy was implemented with very little to show for it.  And the President believes it’s time to try a new strategy where we more thoroughly engage the government, and more thoroughly engage the people to give them more voice and to give the Cuban people the opportunity to have more say in the direction of their country and in the leadership of their country.
Q    And, finally, in an interview with Governor Abbott of Texas, he said that it’s not his responsibility -- even though his lawsuit, in fact, stopped at least temporarily the President’s executive actions -- it’s not his responsibility to figure out what to do with the 11 million undocumented immigrations who are in this country; that it’s the President’s to work with Congress.  Does the President have any new initiatives that he’s going to present to Congress on how to least deal with the 11 million who are here while this court ruling stands?
MR. EARNEST:  Well, a number of things come to mind -- I didn’t see the specific interview that you’re referencing.  The first thing that comes to mind is I think that everybody understands that it is unrealistic to suggest that the United States  will devote the resources to deporting all 11 million people who are here.  It's unrealistic.  It would be cost-prohibitive.  And the President talked a little bit in the town hall meeting yesterday about the negative economic consequences that would have for the country.
What the President has cited is that we should actually bring some accountability to our immigration system.  And one way we can do that is to offer some relief to those individuals that have family members in this country and that have been in this country for a number of years.  And by doing so, we can bring them out of the shadows; we can submit them to background checks; we can weed out those individuals who may pose a threat to public safety; and then we can also ensure that those individuals are paying taxes.
And according to a lot of independent analysis, that would have very positive economic benefits for the country.  And we’ve seen that a number of law enforcement officials, including some local law enforcement officials in Texas, have said that it would make their communities safer.
Q    I understand your position.  Is the President going to Congress now, again, with a new plan, saying let’s deal with this?  Or is he just going to sit back and wait and see whether or not they adopt Senate did a year ago?
MR. EARNEST:  Well, the President is certainly interested in seeing Congress move forward on compromise, common-sense immigration reform legislation.  The United States Senate did do that in 2013, and we certainly would be supportive of the Congress picking up where they left off, seeing the Senate pass that legislation and finally have it be brought to the floor of the House of Representatives.  But the fact is that was something that was blocked by congressional Republicans for a year and a half.  And there’s been no indication that they’re prepared to change their position, at least yet. 
But if there are additional conversations that members of Congress want to have with the President about trying to pass immigration reform legislation, the President would be happy to have those conversations.  In fact, I'm confident that the President would be happy to host those conversations.  But we haven’t seen a lot of interest in this from Republicans on Capitol Hill.  And the fact is that means that means that they are continuing to advance a system that is the closest thing that we have to amnesty; that right now, because of their failure to act, and because they’re aided and abetted by people like Governor Abbott, we have 11 million people running around this country without being held accountable for it. 
And the President has proposed a common-sense way that’s well within his executive authority to bring some accountability to the system.  To make these individuals who’ve been here for some time submit to a background check, pay their taxes.  It also has the benefit of ensuring that some of these individuals who have been in this country for a substantial period of time and are making a tangible contribution to these communities no longer have to live in fear of one day being separated from their family. 
So the President has been put forward a common-sense solution both in legislative form; he has also taken steps to try to address this problem and bring some accountability to the system using his executive authority.  And, frankly, it is irresponsible for Republicans to not act on this.
Okay, Ed.
Q    Josh, are there are any regrets here on the Clinton Foundation story that the ethics deal that White House aides, administration officials negotiated with Secretary Clinton and the Clinton Foundation failed to prevent the Algerian government from contributing half a million dollars to the Clinton Foundation the very time that they were lobbying this White House, the State Department?  Wasn’t this what the President was trying to prevent?
MR. EARNEST:  Well, Ed, let’s go back to 2008.  At the end of 2008, there was a memorandum of understanding that was drafted between the then-transition team and the Clinton Foundation, and the goal of that memorandum was to ensure that the excellent work that is being done at the Clinton Foundation could continue. 
This is work that involves providing HIV and AIDS medicine to children in Africa.  It involves trying to meet the needs of people who are in extreme poverty.  Later it involved trying to bring relief to the citizens of Haiti who had been struck by a terrible earthquake -- that they were doing very important work, and we wanted to make sure that that work could continue without interfering with the responsibility of Secretary Clinton to represent the United States government in an official capacity.
And that memorandum of understanding went beyond the baseline ethical guidelines.  It put in place some additional requirements to ensure that we could -- that the Clinton Foundation could continue its work, and that the Secretary of State could do her work without even the appearance of a conflict of interest.  And we are --
Q    But it failed then, because then a half million dollars came in from a government that was accused of human rights abuses and was lobbying this administration for relief.  How do you explain then, given these wonderful ethics rules that this mistake was made?
MR. EARNEST:  Well, again, for compliance with the memorandum of understanding, I’d refer you to the State Department.  They're ultimately responsible for executing the agreement.  And obviously there was some responsibility at the Clinton Foundation to live up to it.
Q    -- the White House’s reputation on the line.  This was a negotiation between, as I recall, very senior people like Valerie Jarrett.  This is not just the State Department, not just a foundation.  Does the President have any concerns?  You laid out all the wonderful work the foundation does.  No dispute there.  But what about the appearance of impropriety, these foreign governments trying to get access and wield influence in this President’s administration?
MR. EARNEST:  Well, it is the responsibility of the Department of State to determine how compliance was enforced when it comes to the memorandum of understanding.
Q    Or not, right?
MR. EARNEST:  Well, again, it’s their responsibility to monitor the agreement.  And so I’d refer you to them for questions about this.  But I can tell you that the President is obviously very pleased with the way that Secretary Clinton represented the United States around the globe during her tenure over in Foggy Bottom.
Q    Is the President disappointed at all that this money came in despite the ethics rules?
MR. EARNEST:  The President thinks very highly of the work that Secretary Clinton did while she was in office.
Q    Okay.  I want to ask you about ISIS and Secretary Kerry.  Yesterday, he testified on Capitol Hill and said, “Despite ISIL, despite the visible killings that you see and how horrific they are, we are actually living in a period of less daily threat to Americans and to people in the world than normally.  Less deaths.  Less violent deaths.”  When you have, tragically, American families have seen their family members beheaded by ISIS, we see these images every day -- how could Secretary Kerry make the claim to the American people, to the world that we're safer than we were before?
MR. EARNEST:  Well, I think he could do so with the evidence on his side.  What he was able to demonstrate, and I think what he was discussing, is the success that our military campaign has had in applying significant pressure to the ISIS leadership; that there are thousands of strikes that have been conducted by the United States and our coalition partners to take out ISIL targets, in some cases, even ISIL leadership targets.  Supply lines have been destroyed, fighting positions have been destroyed.  And what this has done is it has prevented ISIL from being able to operate comfortably in Iraq and in Syria.
We have been concerned from the very beginning that ISIL would attempt to use all of the instability and chaos in Syria to try to establish a safe haven that they could then use to launch targets in other locations in the world, and because of the pressure that we have applied, because of the strategy that we have pursued to have fighters on the ground to take the fight to ISIL, and to back them up with military and coalition airstrikes, that pressure has been applied and that has reduced the ability of ISIL to expand their reign of terror.
That said, ISIL continues to be very dangerous, and there have been tragic incidents of violence in which Americans have been killed --
Q    You just said this is preventing ISIL from expanding their reign of terror? 
MR. EARNEST:  That's correct, Ed, that we have been concerned that ISIL would try to establish Syria as a safe haven where they could then use that area to plan and execute terror attacks all around the globe. 
Q    Would you disagree with James Clapper, the President’s Director of National Intelligence?  Because he gave very direct testimony today, among other things, said that 2014 is shaping up to be the most terror attacks and deaths than the previous 45 years that this data has been collected, and said that in 55 years of his personal involvement in intelligence, he’s never seen a bigger threat to the world right now.  How does that square with everything you just said?  He’s the President’s Director of National Intelligence.
MR. EARNEST:  That's right, and he is somebody who is reviewing this intelligence on a daily basis.  What we're talking about here is their capacity.  Their capacity has been limited because of our efforts in Iraq and in Syria, because of our efforts to shut down their financing, because of our efforts to use military airpower to take out ISIL targets, because of our efforts to arm and equip fighters on the ground to take the fight to them.
We are seeing the ISIL leadership is not operating comfortably in that area of the world, and they’re under extensive and extreme pressure.  That does not mean that the threat that they pose has been eliminated.  There is significant work that remains to be done.  And it's important for us to be vigilant.  It's why we're going to continue to pursue this multifaceted strategy to shut down their financing, to try to shut down the flow of foreign fighters, to try to counter their messaging that radicalizes people around the globe.
And we’re going to continue to train and equip even more fighters to take the fight to them on the ground.  And we’re going to continue this airstrike campaign against them.  And that has allowed us to make progress against them.  But the effort to degrade and ultimately destroy them is one that’s going to continue.
Q    And last one.  Last summer you said that a lot of the President’s efforts have brought tranquility to the world.  Do you stand by that?
MR. EARNEST:  I stand by the fact that what the President has done on numerous occasions -- has used American influence, American diplomacy, and American military power to try to make the world a safer place for the American people.  And there is no doubt that we face significant threats from terrorist organizations and others around the globe.  The world is a dangerous place.  But there is no doubt that the President is using his authority as the Commander-in-Chief to protect the American people and to make it a safer place for the American people.
Alexis.
Q    Two quick questions.  Can you indicate what the President’s reaction to the FCC ruling on net neutrality is and whether he looks forward to the government defending the FCC’s ruling in court?
MR. EARNEST:  Alexis, I have not -- when I walked up here they had not yet taken the final vote on this net neutrality provision.  This is an independent process, so what I will say is I know they’re planning to vote on it later today.  Once they take a vote on that measure, we’ll evaluate exactly what it is they voted on --
Q    They did.
MR. EARNEST:  They did?  Okay.  So our policy team will be taking a look exactly what it is that they approved. 
Early indications were that it was going to be in line and consistent with the position that the President had articulated last November.  But we’ll take a look at that, and once our policy folks have had an opportunity to review the policy that they’ve approved, we’ll have a reaction from the President for you.
Q    The second question relates to Ukraine.  I wanted to go back to the question of costs that are on the table.  Is the President supportive of talking to allies about the potential of coordinating jettisoning Russia from SWIFT?  Do you know what SWIFT is?
MR. EARNEST:  I don’t.
Q    Okay.  SWIFT is like the ATM, it's like the ability in which the banking money moves so that Russia can tap into --
MR. EARNEST:  I see.
Q    And that is one cost that’s been talked about potentially. 
MR. EARNEST:  I see.  Well, I can tell you that I'm sure my colleagues at the Treasury Department know a whole lot more about this than I obviously do, so I’d refer you to them in terms of getting a better sense about what sort of options they’re considering.
We have in the past been reluctant to talk about the options that we’re considering because we wouldn’t want to essentially announce the steps that we are preparing to take because it would only allow individuals who would be the targets of those steps to take actions that would move their money around or shield them from the steps that we’re trying to take. 
But for better insight into the policy dilemma, or at least the policy decision that needs to be made on this, I’d refer you to the Treasury Department. 
April.
Q    Josh, I want to ask you a couple questions.  With everything that’s going on with immigration on the Hill, yesterday the head of Homeland Security was on the Hill.  Could you give us some information about his conversations?  Did he have a conversation with the President following his Hill visit, and what that Hill visit entailed?
MR. EARNEST:  I don’t believe that the DHS Secretary had an opportunity to speak to the President.  The President was on the road for most of the day yesterday, and I don’t believe that the two of them connected on the phone. 
And I'm not aware of all of the meetings that the Secretary had.  I know that for weeks now, he has been meeting with both Democrats and Republicans.  But he’s spending most of his time trying to urge Republicans to do the responsible thing and ensure that his agency that’s responsible for protecting the homeland of the United States of America is properly and fully funded through the end of the year, at least until the end of the fiscal year.
The other irony that struck me about this is that the thing that we’re not debating right now are what the funding levels should be, that the hard work -- the difficult part of this, of making policy decisions about what the appropriate funding levels are and which elements of the Department of Homeland Security need what level of resources, that all of that work has been done.  And right now it's just a matter of whether or not we’re going to implement a compromise that just about everybody has agreed to. 
That’s what I think is such a disappointing fact about this situation, is that the hard work of making policy decisions about the proper funding levels for the Department of Homeland Security has been done and agreed to across party lines.  Right now, it's just the responsibility of Republican leaders in Congress to move that bipartisan agreement across the finish line.  And their failure to do so would have negative consequences for the country. 
Q    So can you detail and go into specifics about the negative consequences for the country?  I mean, we hear certain things about how it would affect -- just broad brushed strokes -- how it would affect anti-terrorism efforts, and how it would effect this place as well, and the furloughs, the possible furloughs of tens of thousands.  Could you go into a little bit more detail about the negative effects?
MR. EARNEST:  Well, I'm sure that the Department of Homeland Security can get you some more detailed information about this, but I think generally speaking, I think the most obvious consequence is that we would have more than 100,000 DHS personnel that are on the frontlines of keeping the country safe, they would be responsible for showing up to work on Monday without knowing they’re going to get a paycheck for it.  And knowing the professionalism of these men and women, I'm confident that they’re going to show up and do a good job.   But it certainly isn’t fair.  And it certainly doesn’t give them the kind of support that they deserve, for leaders in Congress to not give them a paycheck because of a political dispute with the President of the United States who happens to be in a different party. 
Failing to do that would be a failure of Republican leadership.  And hopefully we’re not going to reach that eventuality.  The other consequences are we would see tens of thousands of other DHS employees be furloughed, so they wouldn’t show up to work.  That can’t be good for our Homeland Security.  There’s a bunch of other processes that would be stopped or at least slowed down, particularly as they relate to processing emergency assistance to states that need it. 
So there is important work that is at risk here, and hopefully we’ll see Republicans and Republican leaders come to their senses and do the right thing for the country and move across the finish line a bipartisan agreement to fund the Department of Homeland Security for the rest of the year. 
Q    And the next subject -- today is February 26th, the three-year anniversary of the death of Trayvon Martin.  There was an outgrowth of the death of Trayvon Martin here at the White House with a “My Brother’s Keeper” event.  Three years later, what is the President thinking?  What has he learned?  What does he want to do moving forward?
MR. EARNEST:  Well, I think the most important lesson for the President out of this is that there are a lot of important things that the President of the United States can do without passing a piece of legislation.  There is no bill that created the “My Brother’s Keeper” initiative, but by mobilizing local elected officials and leaders in the private sector to try to address this urgent need in communities across the country, there’s an opportunity to make a real difference. 
And the President is pleased that after three years, that substantial progress has been made on the “My Brother’s Keeper” initiative.  But there’s a whole lot more work that needs to be done.  And I do think that this will be an important legacy of -- the historians who evaluate the presidency of Barack Obama will take a careful look at.
Q    So you’re saying that this is a heart issue?  To a certain extent that it's trumped -- this heart issue kind of trumped legislation?
MR. EARNEST:  No I'm not saying that.  The case that I'm making is that there is very important work that can be done in communities all across the country and that can make a real difference in the lives of thousands of people that doesn't require legislation; that the President using his executive authority that the President can use, capitalizing on his stature at the leader of the free world, that he can make a real difference in the lives of people all across the country.
And more importantly, he can mobilize other people who are concerned about their communities, who want to get involved in their communities, to try to address some of these urgent needs. And the President believes that it’s good for those individual communities, but it’s also good for the country.  And he’s certainly proud of the progress that's been made so far, but also recognizes the important work that needs to be done.
Q    Did he reach out to Trayvon Martin’s family today at all?
MR. EARNEST:  I don't have any conversations with them to read out at this point.
Michelle.
Q    Thanks, Josh.  On AIPAC, without the President or the Vice President or the Secretary of State speaking, this is something different than in past years, isn’t it?
MR. EARNEST:  Well, not necessarily.  I know that there are other years in which the administration has been represented at AIPAC by individuals other than the President or the Vice President.  I can get you a list of previous speakers.  For like a week I’ve had a page in my book that described all the previous speakers at AIPAC, so we can get you that list.  I know that it exists.
Q    But within this administration?
MR. EARNEST:  Yes, within this administration.  So there are two times in which the President has spoken.  The Vice President has spoken to the gathering at least once.  But the other occasions were -- the message from the administration was delivered by other senior members of the President’s national security team.  And that's the case this year, as well.
Q    But the delay in deciding and the timing of this, you have to know that the perception is there that -- there was tension about this and that it’s not going to be the President.
MR. EARNEST:  Well, the other thing that was included in that sheet that I was given was the time frame under which these sorts of announcements were made.  So let me follow up with some facts.  But what they indicate is that the story is that it’s not at all uncommon for three or four days before the conference is slated to begin that the administration announces the senior administration officials who are participating.
The point here is that the fact that both Ambassador Power and the National Security Advisor Rice are speaking to the group, it's indicative of the commitment of this administration to a strong U.S.-Israel relationship, and that the security cooperation in particular is one that is, under the leadership of this President, is unprecedented.  And that's everything from close intel-sharing relations to working to counter threats from terrorists in the region, to even providing funding for the Iron Dome program that over the summer saved the lives of countless innocent Israelis who were at risk and being targeted by extremists in Gaza that were firing rockets at them.  So --
Q    Is it -- oh, sorry.
MR. EARNEST:  That's okay.
Q    Why isn't the President himself going to say exactly those things in that forum?
MR. EARNEST:  Well, in this case, the President believes that both Ambassador Power and the National Security Advisor, Susan Rice, will do a good job of indicating the administration’s commitment to a strong U.S.-Israel relationship, of indicating that the President and his team are determined to ensure that that relationship isn't reduced to a relationship between a couple of political parties but actually reflects the strong bipartisan consensus that exists in Washington that the United States national security interests are enhanced by assisting in the protection of the national security of our closest ally in the Middle East.
And we've demonstrated a commitment to that principle throughout this President’s tenure in office, and that will continue in the years ahead.
Q    And for the past couple of weeks, whenever it was asked here, does all of this detract from that relationship, or could it be destructive, and you always kind of gave that answer, what you just said about it being a strong relationship.  But now we're hearing that, yes, this is destructive to the relationship. So what has changed in the assessment to actually be saying those words now?
MR. EARNEST:  Well, what we have said all along -- and the President spoke about this at some length at his news conference with Chancellor Merkel -- that there is a long tradition in the United States of ensuring that the relationship between the United States and Israel isn't just reduced to a relationship between political parties; that for a long time, leaders in both parties in this country and in Israel have sought to try to shield that relationship from turbulence associated with party politics.
Look, both in the United States and Israel, we have thriving democracies that occasionally are characterized by a pretty robust and, in some cases, even aggressive political debate.  That's one of the things that we actually have in common with Israel.  It's one of the reasons that we feel a close kinship with that country.  But for a long time, the relationship between our countries has been shielded from that occasionally rambunctious political debate.  And the President believes that that is an important principle that's worth protecting.  And that's something that he’s determined to do, and it's certainly a message that both Ambassador Power and Dr. Rice will present when they speak to AIPAC.
Q    So you're saying that the debate surrounding this is what’s being destructive?  Or is the fact that he’s coming here in this way to give this speech what could be destructive to the relationship?
MR. EARNEST:  Well, no, I'm not trying to squelch a healthy political debate.  What I'm suggesting is that the President believes very strongly that even the appearance of interfering in party politics on one side or the other is bad for our broader relationship.  And in fact, that’s precisely why the President will not be meeting with the Prime Minister when he travels to the U.S. next week. 
As you know, the Prime Minister is on the ballot in Israel and an election is scheduled for just two or three weeks from now, and the President doesn’t want to leave anybody in Israel with the impression that he’s trying to put his thumb on the scale to support one candidate or another.  What I'm confident of is that whoever wins the election will continue to have regular consultations with the U.S. President and that that person will enjoy strong coordination between our government and theirs.  And the President is committed to that because he believes that American national security interests are enhanced by it.
Chris.
Q    Thanks, Josh.  Back on DHS.  You said that the President remains engaged.  What specifically is the President doing to try to avert a shutdown?
MR. EARNEST:  Well, the President, at this point, stands ready to continue to encourage members of Congress to take this common-sense step and ensure that the funding for the Department of Homeland Security doesn’t lapse at the end of the year.  But right now, the principal disagreement is between the Republican leadership of the House of Representatives and the Republican leadership in the United States Senate. 
Q    So you think engagement is the most useful thing right now?
MR. EARNEST:  No.  I think the most useful thing is for the President to stand ready to make the case to Republicans that funding the Department of Homeland Security is a really important thing for them to do.  It's a pretty common-sense case.  I think it's a case that Americans -- I'm sorry -- Democrats and Republicans all across the country would make to congressional leaders if they had the opportunity to make that case.  And certainly the President will make that case if he’s given the opportunity as well.
Q    So if he’s given that opportunity, what does that mean?
MR. EARNEST:  Well, I guess it means if there’s a need for him to have a conversation with Speaker Boehner to move this process along, then he'll do it.  If there’s a need for him to have a conversation with Leader McConnell this week to move this process along, he'll do it.
Right now, the issue is that in the United States Senate they’re poised to approve a full year funding bill for the Department of Homeland Security in bipartisan fashion.  And the question right now is whether or not the Speaker of the House is going to put that up for a vote in the House of Representatives.
If he does, no one has any reason to be worried.  If he does, we know that will strongly pass with bipartisan support in the House.  The President will sign it, and operations at the Department of Homeland Security will not just continue uninterrupted, but they will get the benefit of certainty, knowing that they have a full year funding bill that is at appropriate levels for them to do their important work.
So that's the good outcome.  That good outcome is entirely possible.  It just depends on the Speaker of the House demonstrating some leadership and doing the responsible thing.
Q    I guess I'm just trying to get a sense of what the circumstances would be in which he would proactively get involved.
MR. EARNEST:  Well, the President has had meetings with members of Congress in both parties on a number of occasions over the last six or seven weeks.
Q    But now the clock is really ticking.
MR. EARNEST:  Yes, now the clock is really ticking.  But again, this is not a dispute between Congress and the administration.  As I pointed out in response to somebody’s question earlier, we’ve done the hard work of figuring out what the funding level should be.  We figured out which programs at the Department of Homeland Security deserve which levels of funding, and that required a lot of negotiation and compromise and work across party lines to reach that agreement.  That's the hard work of this process.
The easy work is taking a consensus bipartisan agreement and just moving it through the Congress on time.  When we're talking about something as important as the Department of Homeland Security it shouldn’t be that difficult.  All it requires is a little bit of leadership and I guess a pretty good dose of responsibility.  The question is whether or not the Speaker of the House is actually going to assume it.
Q    Let me just ask you quickly about Jihadi John, understanding again that the U.S. isn’t confirming the name.  Can we assume, though, that -- whether it’s him or others who are directly involved -- that they would be on a no-fly list?
MR. EARNEST:  Well, the no-fly list I believe is maintained by the Department of Homeland Security, so you can check with them about the steps they would take.  But you can be assured that the United States government is using every element at our disposal -- intelligence, even our military capability, certainly our law enforcement capability and our law enforcement relationships -- to bring to justice those individuals who are responsible for the slaughter of innocent Americans.
Q    And you had mentioned a number.  What we’ve heard a lot that there are probably between 100 and 150 Americans who have gone abroad either to train or to fight.  But then with the three arrests in New York and the statements that were made yesterday by James Comey, there obviously is another group who have not left the United States and perhaps will never leave the United States but are still considered to pose a threat.  In fact, what he said yesterday was that the agency is following -- has homegrown, violent extremist investigations in every state.  Is there a number that you know of people who are being followed who are in that category, as opposed to people who have left?  And is the message -- I don't know -- that we're on top of this, or you're at risk wherever you live?
MR. EARNEST:  The message I think is one that we tried to send pretty clearly in the context of the Countering Violent Extremism Summit last week, and that is that the U.S. government is working closely with local officials in communities all across the country to combat violent extremism and to try to counter the efforts from ISIL and other extremist organizations to radicalize vulnerable members of the U.S. population. 
And this is something that we continue to be very mindful of.  And it requires a lot of work, but we certainly have gotten excellent cooperation from local law enforcement and from community leaders.  And there are some communities that actually came to the summit to participate and share their best practices, that some communities have devoted significant time and resources to these efforts and actually shown some important results.  And our efforts to replicate that scenario in communities across the country is a priority of the administration and one that continues every day.
Q    I guess the people that I’ve talked to even who have run some of these programs and believe that they’re useful and important say that's a long-term prospect.  It isn’t something that happens overnight.  So I guess I’m asking, in a more immediate sense, are there any -- do you know of any numbers?  And should people -- I guess following up a little bit on Bill’s question -- should people feel confident in all 50 states that the resources are there?
MR. EARNEST:  Well, I don't have any numbers like that in front of me.  But I can tell you that the American people can be confident that the administration and local law enforcement in communities all across the country are keenly aware of this risk and implementing a coordinated strategy to mitigate it.
Pam.
Q    Thank you.  Following up on Bill’s question, by not publicly unmasking Jihadi John and showing maybe he’s like kind of an ordinary guy, does that raise the risk that he might be more of a celebrity, he might become more of a cult figure and maybe more of a magnet for the scores of Americans who are trying to go over there, and the other Westerners trying to go over there?  
MR. EARNEST:  Well, these are the kinds of equities that I’m confident that our investigators consider.  Ultimately, the goal here is to keep the American people safe.  And our counterparts in the UK are trying to keep the British people safe.  That means engaging in and conducting an exhaustive investigation to try to bring to justice the individual who is responsible for the murder of the citizens in our countries. 
And I’m confident they have evaluated the pros and cons, if you will, of offering up more details about the investigation.  But at this point they have not offered up very many details at all.  That's why I’m certainly not in a position to confirm or deny any details that have been reported today.  But I am confident that if at some point our experts do determine that there is a benefit to talking more publicly about the progress that the investigation has made so far, that they’ll do that.  But they’ll do that only if they conclude that that's in the best interest of the investigation and in the best interest of protecting the American and British people.
Q    And when the President invited some Muslim leaders to the White House several weeks ago, did he made a specific appeal to them to kind of watch their communities for extremism and counter any kind of efforts that might be going on?
MR. EARNEST:  Well, the thing about this, Pam, is that the

	-- first of all, that that was a conversation that covered a pretty wide range of topics.  But they certainly did talk about this issue of countering violent extremism.  And the fact is the leaders in their community are having a conversation about that issue because they want to protect the members of their community.  So they didn't need the President of the United States to come in and say to them that they needed to look out for members of their community.  They're leaders in their community because that's exactly what they're focused on.
And it is why we have been successful in working in partnership with leaders in the Muslim community to try to combat some of the efforts from extremist groups overseas to radicalize people in the Muslim community in this country.  And that has been a successful, fruitful partnership that has protected the American people, including American Muslims.
So that was the nature of at least part of that conversation that was convened here at the White House a few weeks ago.
Q    And if the government does know the identity of Jihadi John, would the Justice Department be already preparing to file charges against him?
MR. EARNEST:  That's a question I don't know the answer to.  You might check with the Department of Justice on that.
Toluse. 
Q    A couple quick questions on trade. 
MR. EARNEST:  Sure.
Q    You said a little bit earlier in the briefing that there are a lot of Republicans who would support the TPP, and you said there are some Democrats.  What is the President doing, as the leader of the Democratic Party, to get more of his party members to support his agenda?  And is he willing to compromise on some of his current positions to assuage some of the concerns of his party members?
MR. EARNEST:  Well, Toluse, I can tell you that just as a practical matter, the President devoted some portion of his State of Union address to talking about why this is important to the country.  The President, as you know, today is doing interviews with a handful of local television anchors from across the country where he’s going to make the case that the communities that they cover are communities that have benefitted significantly from opening up Americans goods and services to overseas exports, and that striking additional agreements that are good for middle-class families would also be good for these individual communities.
And in some ways, that sort of ground-level advocacy is something that I do think will persuade Democrats and Republicans, frankly, to take a close look at some of the trade agreements that the President is trying to broker.
And the President continues to have conversations with Democrats and Republicans all the time, some of which you hear about and some of which you don't, in which he makes a very direct case for why what he wants to do in terms of trying to reach an agreement with a host of other Asia Pacific countries would be in the best interest of the United States.
And one key element of that argument was also a key element of the argument that he made during the State of Union, that if the United States refuses to or fails to engage in this region of the world, that what you’ll see is you’ll see that China, given their own economic aspirations, will engage pretty aggressively in that region of the world in a way that will be disadvantageous to American workers and American businesses and American farmers; that they will seek to lower the kind of standards that we abide by in this country.  So it’s in our interest to try to go to our partners in the Asia Pacific and work with them to abide by the kinds of standards that we regularly abide by.
The benefit of that is the President continues to be confident that if American workers and American entrepreneurs and American businesses and American farmers are given a level playing field, that they can't just compete -- they're going to win.  And that's going to be good for our economy.  It’s going to be good for job creation.  And that is the strategy, and that's the case that the President will be making to members of Congress, frankly, in both parties about this issue.
Q    Has the White House had a chance to read the op-ed by Senator Warren specifically about this issue?  She raised a number of concerns.  Do you have a reaction to that?
MR. EARNEST:  I did have a chance to read a little bit of the op-ed.  What I can just say as a general matter is that -- is that what is contemplated in the agreement is raising standards, including standards that are related to settling disputes between companies that are located in other countries and the United States.
And what the President believes we should do is put in a framework that holds those other countries that are operating in the United States to a higher standard, and that failure to include a standard and failure to include a mechanism for enforcing that standard will only put American workers and American businesses at a disadvantage. 
Again, if we fail to engage in this region of the world, we're going to let China write the rules of the road.  That's not in the best interest of the United States, and it’s certainly not in the best interest of the American economy.
So what is part of this agreement, and where we part ways with the views that are expressed in Senator Warren’s op-ed, is that we're advocating putting in place rigorous standards that raise standards for everybody else.  Because if we know and the President knows that if everybody else is abiding by the terms that American businesses are, that American businesses are going to thrive.  And they're going to benefit from access to those overseas markets, and that means they're going to hire more people.  Their bottom line -- at least their profit line is going to go up, and that's a good thing for the American economy.  It’s certainly a good thing for job creation.  And it would be good for our broader national security.  And the President is going to aggressively make that case.
Q    One quick question on the call the President made yesterday to Walmart’s CEO.  Is the President doing more of these calls to business leaders trying to get them to sort of operate on their own to raise the minimum wage since he hasn’t gotten much progress here in Congress?
MR. EARNEST:  Well, the President -- I don't have any specific calls to read out at this point, but the President over the last year or so has actually traveled to some businesses to give them credit for taking care of their workers.  You’ll recall that when the President was in New York, he went by The Gap and picked up a couple of items for members of his family to bring attention to the fact that Gap had made the decision to raise their workers’ pay.
You’ll recall that after the State of Union a year or two ago, the President visited a Costco to highlight the success that that company had enjoyed at least in part related to the workplace policies that they have in place for their employees. 
So the President is going to continue to look for opportunities to shine a spotlight on those businesses that are doing the right thing by giving their workers a raise.  And again, and this is certainly true of Walmart, they didn't do -- they didn't make that decision to change their policies, give their workers a raise, give them access to more flexible scheduling procedures as a favor to the President; they did it because it’s good business.  It’s good for their bottom line.  It’s good for worker retention.  And we're confident that other businesses are going to reach the same conclusion.
We just think that, again, that Congress should reach the same conclusion, and they should give all American workers a raise.
Tommy.
Q    Thanks, Josh.  I have three quick questions for you.  First one, on Jihadi John, can you explain what value you would put on Jihadi John as a target?
MR. EARNEST:  That's not --
Q    Obviously, he’s a symbolic --
MR. EARNEST:  Yes.  We remain committed to making sure that the individuals who are responsible for the murder of American citizens are brought to justice.  And that makes any individual who is responsible for killing Americans a valuable target.  And the President has and will continue to devote significant resources to bringing those individuals to justice.
Q    So there’s no special attention for him?
MR. EARNEST:  Well, again, you’d have to talk to the Department of Justice as they conduct this investigation if you wanted a sort of assessment of where he ranks on the list.  But in the mind of the President, he ranks highly on the list because that individual is responsible for the murder of innocent Americans, and the President is determined to bring them to justice.
Q    We heard about this threat from al-Shabaab on the Mall of America over the weekend.  And under current law, as I'm sure you’re aware, that there’s nothing to prevent a couple of lone wolves from going to a gun show and getting everything that they need to inflict mass causalities at a place like the Mall of America.
So what I'm wondering is if there is any sort of thought being given to close the gun show loophole and strengthen background checks in the interest of national security.  And if there isn’t, then why not?
MR. EARNEST:  Well, the President certainly believes that there are some common-sense steps that we can take that would ensure that we continue to protect the Second Amendment rights of law abiding citizens while also making it harder for those who shouldn’t get guns to get them.
The President has pushed a variety of legislative proposals to try to effectuate those changes.  The President has also put in place a large number -- I think two dozen or so -- executive actions to try to take those steps.  And those executive actions have been important and successful.  But there is more work that can be done, again, to implement common-sense measures that would both protect the Second Amendment rights of law-abiding Americans while making it harder for those individuals who shouldn’t have firearms from getting them.
Q    Finally, you know that CPAC is going on right now.  I just got this over my Twitter that Governor Chris Christie has said at CPAC that the people here at the White House, somebody should tell them to shut up.  And I'm wondering if you have any reaction to that?  What happened?  I mean, it seems like only yesterday that he and the President were throwing footballs on the boardwalk -- (laughter) -- and now this.
MR. EARNEST:  You would have to ask him that.
Julie.
Q    Just to follow up on trade, you mentioned one of the aims for today’s interviews is to persuade Republicans and Democrats that this is a good thing.  Does the President think that right now the support is there for trade promotion authority in Congress today?  And if not, how far away does he think he is to getting the support that he would need -- both among Democrats and among enough Republicans to make up the difference, because there are some Democrats who have said they will never support this -- to actually be able to get that through and to be able to finish the Trans-Pacific Partnership?
MR. EARNEST:  Well, I think it's hard to assess because there isn’t specific TPA legislation that’s been put forward yet. But I know that there are Democrats and Republicans on the Hill that are working on that, maybe even as we speak. 
So I think at that point we’ll be in a better position to start counting votes and getting a sense of where people stand on this.  You’re right that there are some people who have -- in both parties, frankly -- who have sort of ruled it out on principle without even considering what the legislation includes. But I think the vast majority of members of Congress are interested in seeing the specific legislative proposal.  And that will also give us an opportunity, once the proposal has been written, to do two things.
One is to persuade them of some of the details that are included in the proposal, that those would be a good thing.  It also would allow the legislative process to work.  If there are specific provisions that members of Congress have concerns about, then they can offer up some tweaks or some changes or some edits that might garner additional broader support.
And so there will obviously be a legislative process associated with this, and the President will be engaged in that process in making the case both to Democrats and Republicans that this is something that is clearly in the best interest of the country and clearly in the best interest of the middle-class families that live here.
Q    Has the President or anyone at the White House weighed in on those negotiations on the front end to make sure that the proposal is something that -- would be something that he could accept?  I mean, after all, this is a grant of authority to the President.  So is he going to propose what he thinks it should say?
MR. EARNEST:  Well, I know that there have been conversations between White House staff and members and staff on Capitol Hill on this topic.  And so there has been administration-level engagement.  I don’t know of any specific conversations that the President has had on this, but I know that he’s had the opportunity to talk about this to some of the congressional leaders.  So again, that’s part of the legislative process.  There will be a committee process where this will go through the committee, but obviously the leaders will have some influence on this as well.  And the President I know for sure has had some conversations with congressional leadership on the issue. 
Q    Can I follow up?
MR. EARNEST:  Sure, David.
Q    Does the President or does the White House believe that the TPA bill, once it's introduced in the Senate, was going to be a bipartisan effort?  And does the White House believe it has to be a bipartisan effort to have a chance?
MR. EARNEST:  Most congressional observers, who may know a little bit more about this process than I do, I think do assume that it's going to require Democrats and Republicans in both houses of Congress getting together to advance this.  So we are operating from the premise that it will require bipartisan support. 
Now, if there is a way for -- well, I'm not sure there is another way.  We are working in bipartisan fashion to try to get both Democrats and Republicans to support it.
Q    So you think the bill will be introduced in bipartisan --
MR. EARNEST:  That I don’t know.  I think that will depend on the ongoing conversations in Congress.  I think it certainly would be a good and important first step for there to be Democrats and Republicans who support the first draft of this legislation.
Q    And the other thing is, I know that on the Hill they’re talking about trying to do this in the first quarter of the year, which would be end of March.  Does the White House see that as a realistic goal?  And does the White House and the administration more broadly believe that’s a mandatory goal to have TPA in place that quickly to get TPP done?
MR. EARNEST:  Well, I'm not in a good position to sort of assess whether or not that’s realistic.  But obviously, the legislative process is one that sometimes can be a little arduous and sometimes take a little longer than we would like.  But this is something that is worthy of careful consideration in the Congress.  And we would like to see it done as quickly as possible, but we also want to make sure that it's done in a way that can build support among members of Congress in both parties so that it can pass.
So we certainly feel a sense of urgency about it, but I wouldn’t put a timeframe on it from here right now. 
All right, Bob, I’ll give you the last one.
Q    Thank you, Josh.  A couple days ago the President vetoed the Keystone XL pipeline bill.  There aren’t enough votes to override.  The President said he wanted to let the State Department review process continue to play itself out.  Is there any reason to believe -- or any timeline for that process to be completed ever?  Or is it just going to politically be left to die of neglect?  Is there any reason to expect that review process to finish? 
MR. EARNEST:  Yes, I think you can expect that the State Department will complete the task that is in front of them.  That’s their responsibility, and I'm confident that they’ll do it.  I don’t know, at this point, exactly what the timeframe for that final decision and final review to be completed will be.  But you can check with the State Department; they may be able to give you a better estimate of the timeframe that we’re looking at here. 
Q    Also, we’re getting into political -- the presidential campaign season already. 
MR. EARNEST:  Yes, I know, it always seems that way.  But there is an opportunity for us, and certainly the experts at the Department of State and the other relevant federal agencies, to evaluate this process without the influence of politics -- to really focus on the merits and the consequences, and put forward a decision to the President about whether or not it is clearly in the national interest to construct the pipeline.  And hopefully we’ll get that done soon. 
Thanks, everybody.  Have a good day. 
END   

	2:01 P.M. EST

	 
The White House
Office of the Press Secretary
James S. Brady Press Briefing Room
1:40 P.M. EST
MR. EARNEST:  Good afternoon, everybody.  I apologize for the delay.  Let me just do two quick things at the top before we get to your questions.
The first is that President Obama will host Afghan President Ghani, Chief Executive Officer Abdullah, and key members of their unity government for meetings and a working lunch at the White House on Tuesday, March 24th.  The two Presidents will discuss a range of issues, including security, economic development, and U.S. support to the Afghan-led reconciliation process.
This marks the first meeting between the two Presidents at the White House, following the 2014 presidential election, which produced the first democratic transfer of power in Afghan’s history.  While in Washington, from March 22-25, President Ghani and his delegation will also engage in high-level strategic dialogue hosted by Secretary Kerry at Camp David. 
President Ghani’s visit highlights the importance of continuing bilateral cooperation and the American commitment to our U.S.-Afghan strategic partnership to reinforce regional security and sustain the achievements of the last 13 years.
So that will be something to look forward to about three weeks from now. 
The other thing is we're going to mark another departure here in the White House Briefing Room.  Today is the last day for Larry Downing, photographer from Reuters.  I don't see him in the room right now.  But he has served here in the White House for 38 years.  And he is somebody whose career has been recognized not just for its talent but also for the way that he conducts himself as a true professional.  There he is.  (Applause.) 
So, Larry, thank you for your service, and congratulations on retirement.
MR. DOWNING:  Thank you.
MR. EARNEST:  You're welcome. 
All right, Darlene, now that we have the festivities out of the way we can go to your questions.
Q    Josh, will you say whether the President would sign a three-week extension of funding for DHS if Congress sent that to him?
MR. EARNEST:  Well, Darlene, it's, first, important for us to recognize that there actually is one piece of funding legislation that has passed the Congress, at least the United States Senate, with bipartisan support just today, and that piece of legislation was a bill that would fund the Department of Homeland Security for the rest of this fiscal year.  And it is a bill that was negotiated between Democrats and Republicans on Capitol Hill last year with the input of the administration.  It sets appropriate funding guidelines for this critically important agency.  And it has earned strong bipartisan support in the United States Senate. 
It is now sitting on the floor of the United States House of Representatives.  And the Speaker of the House now has one fundamental question:  Is he going to put that bill up for a vote?  If he does, it will pass with bipartisan support, and the agency that is responsible for protecting the homeland of the United States will be fully funded for this fiscal year. 
The Secretary of Homeland Security has made clear just how important this is.  Members of Congress in both parties have made clear how important it is for that agency to be funded for the full fiscal year.  The question is whether or not the Speaker of the House will deliver. 
And before I came down here -- I was actually delayed because I was printing out something that all of you have read.  On the day after the election, the Speaker of the House, John Boehner, and the Senate then-Minority Leader, Mitch McConnell, wrote an op-ed in the Wall Street Journal that apparently was ironically titled, “Now We Can Get Congress Going.”  So I think they’ve made pretty clear today -- well, I guess the Speaker has a chance to pull the fat out of the fire here, but we'll see if he’s willing to do it, and willing to live up to the promises that he made to the American people on the day after the election, when Republicans, with a lot of fanfare, took the majority of both the House and the Senate.
Q    What happens if he’s not willing to do that?  Where does it go from there then?
MR. EARNEST:  Darlene, you’re so pessimistic today.  Well, listen, if the President is faced with a choice of having the Department of Homeland Security shut down or fund that Department for a short term, the President is not going to allow the agency to shut down. 
But let’s remember how exactly we got here.  We got here because back in December, the Speaker of the House had on his desk a compromise proposal that had bipartisan support to fund the entire federal government through the end of the fiscal year, through September 30th.  And he made a strategic calculation that he would fund the entire government through the end of the fiscal year except for the Department of Homeland Security.  And he said we’re going to hold back the funding for the Department of Homeland Security until we can figure out how to maximize our political advantage; we want to figure out the best way that we can actually score some political points with the passage of that budget.
Now, here we are, two months later -- a little over two months later.  It is the day of the self-imposed deadline, the deadline that was imposed by Republicans.  And apparently, over the course of the last two months, they have not yet figured out how to maximize their political advantage.  And it exposes the danger of playing politics with our homeland security, and it represents an abject failure of leadership on the part of the new Republican majority to not get this done.
So the truth is, if the President is faced with a choice between a short-term extension and shutting down the Department of Homeland Security, he will sign the short-term extension.  But the good news is that’s not the choice that’s facing the Speaker of the House and it’s not the choice that should be facing every member of the United States Congress.  Right now, the choice the Speaker is facing is, are we going to fund the agency for three weeks, or are we going to fund it for the full year, and are we going to do it at levels that are agreed upon by Democrats and Republicans as clearly in the best interest of the American people.
So the truth is, the choice for the President is a little difficult, but the choice for the Speaker of the House is really easy.  Let’s hope he makes the right one.
Q    On another subject, Wisconsin Governor Scott Walker has been taking some heat for comments that some have interpreted as comparing members of organized labor to Islamic State terrorists. Does the White House have any reaction to what he said or the comparison he was making?
MR. EARNEST:  We do not.
Q    Labor union members are a big constituency that the White House has supported over the years.  You don’t want to come to their defense?
MR. EARNEST:  I think they’re more than capable of defending themselves in this instance.
Roberta.
Q    Back to the visit that you talked about at the top.  The Afghan President has asked President Obama to address the timeline for the withdrawal of U.S. troops, and I’m wondering whether the President has made a decision on that.
MR. EARNEST:  Well, the President has made a decision in terms of what he believes our strategy should be.  And the strategy that the President has laid out is a steady, responsible drawdown of our military presence in Afghanistan.  And he’s going to do that in a way that’s coordinated very closely with our NATO allies that have themselves made a significant military commitment to Afghanistan.  He will also do that in coordination with the Afghan government as they assert more control and demonstrate more success in repelling some of the extremist elements in their country.
The mission for the U.S. military personnel that are currently in Afghanistan is a mission that’s focused on two things.  One is counterterrorism and taking counterterrorism strikes that will protect our military presence in Afghanistan.  They also are engaged in an effort to continue to train, advise and equip the Afghan security forces.  And that’s the focal point of their efforts right now.
The President has said all along that he’s going to continue to monitor the implementation of this drawdown strategy to ensure that it reflects the priorities of American national security, but also one that reflects the security situation on the ground in Afghanistan.
So the President is going to continue to listen to his military commanders.  He’s going to continue to listen to senior members of his national security team.  And he’s also going to engage in a dialogue with our partners in the Afghan government about the proper pace of this drawdown.  But we certainly -- the President certainly intends and we continue to be on track to fulfill his promise.
Q    So does he plan to address that pace during the visit? Is that something that’s going to be on the agenda for discussions?
MR. EARNEST:  Well, I guess as you alluded to, President Ghani has indicated that that is something that he wants to discuss with the President and has been discussing with American officials.  So I’m confident that President Ghani will bring it up, and I’m confident that there will be a discussion of it.
Q    And on DHS funding, on Monday, President Obama told governors that a shutdown would have a direct impact on the economy and a direct impact on national security.  And I’m just wondering, given the importance, why he hasn’t been sort of more engaged -- outwardly engaged in discussing the impact and trying to find a resolution.
MR. EARNEST:  Well, first of all, I haven’t heard many people, at least with any credibility, question the impact or question the importance of ensuring that the Department of Homeland Security is funded to the extent that anybody has raised any doubts about that.  The Secretary of Homeland Security himself has, every day this week, I believe, been walking the halls of Congress talking to members -- Republican members, principally -- about the importance of getting this done.
And principally, this has been a dispute over the last several weeks between Republicans in the House and Republicans in the Senate -- again, certainly not consistent with the headline on their op-ed from the day after last year’s election.  But fortunately, we did see a large number of Republicans come around to the idea -- the reasonable conclusion that the Department of Homeland Security needs to be funded for the entire fiscal year at appropriate levels, at levels that were negotiated in bipartisan fashion with the administration, to ensure that we were maximizing the ability of the Department of Homeland Security to protect the American people.
So this has principally been a dispute between Republicans on Capitol Hill.  And now that we are moving toward a resolution through the passage of this bipartisan bill in the Senate, again, this is a common-sense test of leadership for the Speaker of the House, and it’s up to him –- and my guess is he’s feeling a little pressure right now, as he should.
Q    But what kind of leadership has the President been showing in terms of finding a resolution?  In the past 24 hours, has he been calling people on the Hill?  What’s he been doing?
MR. EARNEST:  The good news, Roberta, is the President demonstrated leadership at the end of last year to ensure that we could negotiate a DHS budget that would have strong bipartisan support and that would maximize the ability of that agency to protect the homeland.  So that’s the hard work here, trying to set levels, figuring out which programs should be funded and at what level, and doing all that in a fiscally responsible way.  That’s hard work that requires negotiation.  It requires compromise.  It requires a cold-eyed assessment of what programs are working and what aren’t.  It requires an evaluation of what kinds of threats are facing the country.  It requires some decisions to be made about what kind of technology to invest in to protect our cybersecurity. 
All of these are core functions of the Department of Homeland Security.  And because of the President’s leadership and because of the hard work of Democrats and Republicans on Capitol Hill, and because of the success of our experts here inside the administration, we reached a bipartisan agreement.  And it’s the responsibility of the leaders in Congress to make sure that that agreement passes.
And the good news is we have also succeeded in building a bipartisan majority in both Houses for this bill.  The question now is just whether or not the Speaker of the House is simply going to allow it come up for a vote.  So it’s not a question of negotiating the contents of the legislation.  We’re not in a situation where we’re trying to figure out the legislative mechanics.  We’re not even in a situation where we’re out there trying to twist arms and count votes.  All of that’s been done.
The only thing that remains in place now is whether or not the Speaker of the House is going to put it on the floor for a vote.  The Speaker could even vote no if he wants.  It will still pass, and we’ll still make sure that we’ve got the necessary funding to protect the American people.
Michelle.
Q    On the upcoming Netanyahu speeches, there’s so much attention focused not only on the one in Congress but also AIPAC. Is this just going to turn into a situation of sort of dueling speeches between what he says on Iran versus what Susan Rice and Samantha Power are going to try to put out there for the administration?
MR. EARNEST:  Well, I certainly hope not.  I know that the focal point of the remarks that the National Security Advisor and the U.N. Ambassador will be delivering will be focused on the importance and strength of the relationship between the United States and Israel. 
The President has pursued a policy that reflects how important it is to U.S. national security for us to stand shoulder-to-shoulder with our strongest ally in the Middle East. He has done that.  He hasn’t just talked that talk, he’s walked that walk.  And that is something that is easy to demonstrate. Whether you evaluate the success of the Iron Dome program, an American-funded program that has shielded innocent Israeli citizens when they are being targeted by extremists and their rockets -- even the Prime Minister himself has said that the level of security cooperation between the Netanyahu administration and the Obama administration is unprecedented.  That certainly reflects the dangerous environment that Israel is operating in right now, and it also demonstrates the commitment of this administration to protecting and standing closely with our closest ally in the region.
I will also say that the dogged determination that this administration and this country and our international partners have demonstrated in bringing Iran to the negotiating table to try to resolve the international community’s concerns with their nuclear program isn’t just in the clear national security interest of the United States; it’s also clearly in the best interest of Israel.
So time and again, whether it is standing shoulder-to-shoulder with Israel, or taking the kinds of actions that are consistent with the national security interests of both of our countries, the President has aggressively led in the right direction.  And that will be the focal point of their remarks, and I think it is worthy of the kind of relationship that the President has sought to cultivate and continue and strengthen between our two countries.
Q    They could just use what you said right there.
MR. EARNEST:  They could.  They could.  I wasn’t invited to speak at AIPAC, but maybe next year.
Q    So Netanyahu’s coming now at this –- you could call it a critical time again in the process.  Is it bad for the negotiations?  I mean, him going before Congress and possibly even asking them to enact sanctions or something like that -- is that bad for the negotiations?
MR. EARNEST:  I think the short answer to that is I don’t think so.  And the reason is simply that there is a real opportunity for us here, and the President is hopeful that we are going to have an opportunity to do what is clearly in the best interests of the United States and Israel, which is to resolve the international community’s concerns about Iran’s nuclear program at the negotiating table. 
And it is true that the Prime Minister has been critical of that effort to date, but he was also pretty critical of the Joint Plan of Action, which was essentially sort of the first stage of these talks.  In the context of the Joint Plan of Action, the Prime Minister characterized that agreement as a “historic mistake.”  His administration predicted that Iran would get upwards of $50 billion in sanctions relief, and he warned that Iran had a dangerously large stockpile of uranium that had been enriched to 90 percent -– or to 20 percent. 
But the fact is, if you go back and look at the agreement, the agreement has actually succeeded in eliminating that stockpile.  That stockpile no longer exists.  Some of it has been dispensed with and some of it has been turned into a form of uranium that’s difficult to weaponize.
And the other thing that is also true is that the amount of sanctions relief that they predicted that Iran would get didn’t come to fruition.  In the first six months of the Joint Plan of Action, a small fraction of the sanctions relief was provided -- so on the order of like $6 billion or $7 billion, not $50 billion.  And, ultimately, the Joint Plan of Action we know has been a useful document because Iran has come to the negotiating table and engaged in serious discussions because of the Joint Plan of Action, because they’ve been held accountable for their actions.
And we also know that over the course of those negotiations, because of the inspections regime, we know that Iran has not only not made progress on their nuclear program, in fact, they’ve actually rolled it back by destroying –- as I mentioned earlier

	–- their 20 percent uranium stockpile.
Q    Sort of the argument that’s out there that his doing this, even though it might not have any immediate effect and anything that he tries to persuade Congress to do could be vetoed anyway, but that it could put the U.S. in a better bargaining position anyway, with this happening here.  Do you buy that?
MR. EARNEST:  Well, I haven’t heard that analysis.  I suppose you could make the case that that’s true, but I’m not quite sure exactly what that case would look like.  And the reason I say that is what has been so critical to our success thus far is the unanimity of opinion across the international community.  We have put in place a very strict sanctions regime against Iran, one of the toughest sanctions regimes in history.  And that effort has been successful because we have persuaded essentially the rest of the world to go along with it.  And some countries have even made a pretty substantial economic sacrifice to do so.  There are other countries that are much more reliant on Iranian oil than the United States. 
So they did have to make a sacrifice by standing with the United States to impose these economic sanctions.  And that is part of why we continue to be concerned about this rhetoric that new sanctions should be imposed now, because it would cause that coalition of countries around the world to start to fray.  And the truth is, that has been critical to our success so far, so we’re hopeful that we’re going to continue to hold this coalition together.  We’re going to hold Iran accountable.  And we’re going to engage in negotiations, and we’ll see if they’re willing to make the difficult decisions necessary to resolve the international community’s concerns. 
And again, what we’re aiming for is an agreement that would prevent Iran from obtaining a nuclear weapon and allow the international community to verify it for themselves; for us to have independent inspectors not just in their nuclear facilities, but at all levels of their nuclear program’s supply chain to verify that they are living up to their terms of the agreement.
So again, this is why the President believes it’s clearly in the best interest of American national security for us to drive toward this solution.  And it’s clearly in the best interest of Israeli national security too.
And I’ll end with this:  The Prime Minister has also not presented an alternative option.  The fact is, if you take away these efforts to reach a diplomatic solution, you take away the limitations on their nuclear program, you take away the inspections regime that has verified that they have not made any progress.  And you essentially take away any of their options to deal with their nuclear program, other than the military option. 
And that is why the American Commander-in-Chief is so focused on pursuing a diplomatic option that, again, in the view of this administration, is actually more effective than the military option.  The military option is one that would of course set back the Iranian nuclear program, but only until it can be rebuilt.  And I think any logical observation would be it would only steel the resolve of the Iranians to rebuild it -- as opposed to a negotiated, diplomatic settlement in which they’re making commitments and choosing of their own volition to restrain their program and to verify for the rest of the international community that they’re not seeking to obtain a nuclear weapon.
Q    Ukraine, Josh.  Both sides appear to have moved at least some heavy weapons back from the front lines today.  That appears to be something of a change in the situation on the ground.  What’s your reaction to that?  Is there any indication that this is going to be more than just a temporary lull in what’s been going on there?
MR. EARNEST:  Well, Mark, we have noted in media reports that both the Ukrainian forces and separatists appear to be withdrawing some heavy weapons.  But we remain concerned by ongoing violations of the Minsk Implementation Plan by Russian-backed separatists.  The pace of attacks in eastern Ukraine has, as you said, declined for now, but it is clear that Russia continues to arm and equip the separatists, including with tanks and artillery.
We’ve also seen that Russia and the Russian-backed separatists have blocked access of the OSCE Special Monitoring Mission, who is supposed to be able to verify that both sides are taking the kinds of steps that are consistent with the Minsk Agreement.
So we certainly are -- have noted those reports, and we certainly want both sides to live up to their agreement, including withdrawing their forces.  But we continue to be concerned that the Russian-backed separatists are being armed and equipped by Russia, and they are preventing the OSCE monitors from verifying that Russia is living up to their side of the agreement.
Q    Where does that leave sanctions?  Do you suppose it’s a coincidence that this happens just at the point that you’re starting to have fresh discussions with the allies about new sanctions?
MR. EARNEST:  It’s a good question.  I think it’s hard to tell exactly how President Putin is making these decisions in terms of the way that he’s sort of evaluating his next steps.  I think one thing that we have learned is that we need to closely watch their actions and not just listen to their words.  I think we’ve also learned that -- there have been a variety of situations in which I’ve come out here with guidance in my book that suggests that things might be getting a little bit better in Ukraine, only to have the Russians reverse course a day or two later and ramp up their destabilizing activity.
So we’re watching their actions very carefully, and not willing to express much relief based on the actions that take place in one day.  What we’re looking for is a sustained commitment to the agreement that they signed in Minsk.
Isaac.
Q    So going back to the Israel situation for a moment.  Did you see the tweet that the Israeli embassy put out yesterday? It was a mock New York Times front page that had -- it was from 2025, and it said -- it was a headline, “How We Duped The West,  -- P5-plus-1:  We have regrets.”  Does the White House have any reaction to that tweet from the embassy or what it represents?
MR. EARNEST:  I did see it.  I’m not really sure what message they were trying to portray. 
Q    You don’t think they were trying to portray that you guys are going in for a bad deal here?
MR. EARNEST:  Well, I guess what I would say to that -- if that is, in fact, what they were trying to portray, I guess I would say that that’s the same -- as I mentioned to Michelle, that’s the same thing they said at the beginning of the Joint Plan of Action.  They said that the Joint Plan of Action would be a historic mistake and a sweetheart deal for Iran.  It certainly hasn’t turned out that way.  In fact, we’ve rolled back their nuclear program because of the Joint Plan of Action.  We’ve verified that they haven’t made any progress because of the Joint Plan of Action.  And we’ve verified -- we’ve noticed that Iran is engaged in serious discussions with the international community because they’re being held to account by the Joint Plan of Action.
So the fact is, their early predictions that the Joint Plan of Action would be a bad deal have, importantly, served the interests of both the United States and Israel.  So I think that’s why we should -- I guess I would encourage all of you to be a little skeptical when they’re saying bad things in the early stages, again, about a deal that hasn’t even been completed.
Q    But that it’s gotten to this level, that they’re tweeting out things like this, is this like electioneering going on on Netanyahu’s behalf?  Is it concerning that it’s reached this level?
MR. EARNEST:  Again, it’s unclear to me exactly what message they were trying to send, and I think it’s even more unclear why they’re trying to send it. 
Q    On another topic -- on Tuesday, the President said, we’re going to be as aggressive as we can on appealing the ruling blocking immigration orders.  The same day, the judge involved said he’s in no hurry to rule on the stay and he’d take at least a week to move on it.  It’s Friday.  “We’re going to be as aggressive as we can.”  Why have we gone this whole week without any movement from the White House?  Can you speak to that?  Is that consistent with being as aggressive as we can?
MR. EARNEST:  Well, I think what I would point to, to demonstrate our aggressiveness in pursuing this through the legal process, is the fact that we filed for an emergency stay; we pushed the judge to rule in the middle of this week.  He said that he wanted to hear from the plaintiffs by the beginning of next.  So it’s taking a little bit longer than we would like, but at the same time, we’ve also sought an expedited appeal at the Fifth Circuit on the merits of the case.
So I think it is fair to say that we’re doing everything we can at this point to try to advance this through the legal process.  We do that because we believe the strongest legal arguments are on our side, and we do that because eventually, implementing these executive actions are clearly in the best interests of the United States, our economy and our security.
Q    Is there any decision about holding off on this while the DHS funding fight is going on?
MR. EARNEST:  Not that I’m aware of.  Again, because we have made pretty clear as often as we could that we consider these to be two entirely different issues; that the objections that Republicans have raised about the President’s efforts to reform our broken immigration system are ones that we’re happy to discuss and, like I’ve mentioned before, we’re not just happy to have those meetings, we’re happy to host them here at the White House, to talk about what we can do to reform our broken immigration system.  But the effort to try to score politics and to sort of find a colorful way to try to show people that you’re standing up to the President of the United States is no excuse for not funding the Department of Homeland Security. 
Olivier.
Q    Josh, a couple for you.  One -- you may have answered this when I was out of the country -- but can you banish any confusion about what the actual Iran timeline deadline is, what date you want to deal by?
MR. EARNEST:  The end of March is what we have said.
Q    The end of March?
MR. EARNEST:  Yes.
Q    But that’s deliberately not the 31st or the 25th or whatever, it’s just the end?
MR. EARNEST:  Yes. 
Q    Okay.
MR. EARNEST:  I mean, there are days after March 25th that are still in March.
Q    Thank you.  (Laughter.)  I will note that.  And then I listened to your announcement at the top that John Kerry will be holding an event with President Ghani at Camp David.  Will the President be part of that event?  And if not, why hold it at Camp David?
MR. EARNEST:  The President will meet with the Afghan President and other senior Afghan officials who are part of the unity government here at the White House.  There are a longer series of meetings that the Secretary of State will convene, and they’ll do that at Camp David.  At this point, I don’t know that the President has planned to participate in those talks.  But obviously, the opportunity to visit with the President of the United States at the White House will be the focal point of their visit.
Q    So what does the Camp David setting add to this process that, say, doing them at State or doing them somewhere else wouldn’t bring?
MR. EARNEST:  I think it’s just an opportunity to really -- to dig into these negotiations and to do it in a way that limits outside distractions.  And I think it also sort of reflects the unique nature of this engagement; sort of this longer period of diplomatic talks here in the United States with our partners in Afghanistan I do think reflects our nation’s commitment to that country, that we continue to have an enduring partnership with them.  And I think it reflects how serious the administration is about engaging with the Afghan leadership in trying to move forward with a sense of unity and a sense of purpose as they confront the challenges in their country and as we deal with the national security threat that continues to exist there.
Q    Camp David has fairly extensive telecommunications abilities.  Any plans to dial in a third country, say Pakistan, to this process -- you have a broader meeting than just the United States and Afghanistan?
MR. EARNEST:  I’m not aware of any current plan like that, but obviously as we get closer to the meeting we’ll be able to talk about what their plans are in a little bit more detail.
Jim.
Q    Across town a few blocks away, Cubans and the Americans are meeting again.  I’m told that one of the -- that the most difficult part of showing any progress right now in opening embassies or anything else is the terrorism list, taking Cuba off the terrorism list.  What is right now the timetable that you see as far as any action on that so that the rest of everything can progress?  And as part of that, do you see that as well as the big holdup as far as any progress is concerned?
MR. EARNEST:  I would not see that as an obstacle to our efforts to try to normalize the relations between our two countries, and certainly when it comes to reestablishing diplomatic ties, we would see these operating on two separate tracks.  And reestablishing those diplomatic ties is the center of the negotiations that are underway at the State Department right now.
And the President has made a commitment to reevaluate the propriety of including Cuba on that list.  The way that it’s been explained to me is that there is a formal process for reviewing an individual country’s status on that list.  The process is run by the State Department, but they deliver a recommendation to the President.  I don't know what the status is of that ongoing review.  You can check with the State Department about that. 
I think the President was pretty clear when he was talking about this in December that he hoped this review could be done in relatively short order.  But it's also something that the administration takes pretty seriously, so a careful, thorough look at this is warranted.  And once that review has been completed, it will be evaluated by the President and we'll have a decision to announce.
Q    You say it's two separate tracks.  But from both sides we hear, from both administration officials and from officials in Cuba, that in order to open an embassy they have to have banking; and in order to get banking, they have to be off the terrorist list, because no bank will, in fact, do business with Cuba -- no U.S. bank will do business with Cuba, and they can't open up their embassy without banking.  So it's not two tracks.  One is prohibiting the other. 
MR. EARNEST:  Well, I'm not seeped in the details of these negotiations, so you might check with the State Department on this.  I know that there has been an effort to try to allow the establishment in opening an operation of a U.S. diplomatic facility in Cuba and a Cuban diplomatic facility in the United States.  And part of these negotiations is trying to remove the obstacles to the successful completion of that goal.  And to the extent that those kinds of things need to be unwound, I'm sure that that's part of the discussion that's underway at the State Department even as we speak.
Q    Do you know whether the United States is willing to assure banks that they will not be sanctioned if they do business with the Cuban government at a new embassy while still waiting for the terrorist list to be decided?
MR. EARNEST:  I'm not aware of any guidance like that that's been given to American financial institutions, but I believe you should check with the Treasury Department about that.
Kevin.
Q    Josh, thanks.  Do you believe, does the administration believe that Iran is a safe haven for al Qaeda and ISIS and other groups?
MR. EARNEST:  Well, Kevin, Iran, as you know, is a Shiite-led country that has their own vigorous differences with al Qaeda and Sunni extremists.  In fact, there’s been a lot of talk about how Iran and Iraq have been coordinating some of their efforts to try to counter those Sunni extremists, particularly the ones that are part of ISIL in Iraq right now. 
So we've got lots of concerns about Iran and the way they conduct business around the globe, including their support for some terror groups.  We do have those concerns, but they’re not related to al Qaeda.
Q    So you don't believe some of the documents that were released in the course of the trial underway in New York that suggest that Osama bin Laden and some of his outfit were actually getting safe haven in Iran?
MR. EARNEST:  Well, I haven't reviewed those documents.  Again, we have a long list of concerns with Iran.  At the top of that list is their nuclear program.  But we continue to have concerns about their support for terrorism around the globe.  We continue to have concerns about the threats that they lob toward Israel on a regular basis.  Israel is, of course, our closest ally in the region and we certainly do not approve of the way that Iran conducts their relationship with Israel.
We've got a number of concerns about Americans who are detained or have gone missing in Iran.  These are all concerns that we raise on a regular basis with the Iranians, but we do so on the sidelines of negotiations to try to resolve our top concern, which is their ongoing efforts to obtain a nuclear weapon and our efforts to resolve the international community’s concerns with their nuclear program.
Q    A couple more.  How would you characterize the Iranian threat to the U.S. and our interests abroad?
MR. EARNEST:  Well, again, we have a long list of concerns with Iran, and at the top of that list is Iran’s nuclear program. These are concerns not just held by the United States but by the broader international community.  And the principal concerns is that Iran, for a number of years, has been trying to surreptitiously develop and acquire a nuclear weapon.  And the concern that we have is essentially twofold.  The first is if Iran were to obtain a nuclear weapon, it would likely set off a nuclear arms race in the Middle East.  That region of the world is already volatile and dangerous enough.  We don't need to add a nuclear arms race to the mix.
The second thing is that Iran on a number of occasions has used anti-Semitic rhetoric and threatened the nation of Israel.  That is our closest ally in the region and to think that somebody -- or a country like Iran that directs those threats towards Israel would acquire a nuclear weapon would not be good news, to say the least.
But we also have concerns about Iran and their support for terrorist organizations around the globe.  We have concerns about Iran and their detention of Americans, and that there’s at least one American that has gone missing in Iran that the Iranian government has failed to explain. 
So we have a long list of concerns.  They are substantial.  But what we're focused on right now is the one at the top of the list, and that is the one that we are focused on.  But we’re very mindful of the others and each interactions that we have with Iranian officials.
Q    So it’s not counterintuitive to sort of extract one problem from the greater problem, which is your perspective that Iran does pose a very serious threat not just to the U.S., but our interests abroad.
MR. EARNEST:  Well, again, I think the fact that we have a long list of concerns is an indication that this is something that we focus on a lot, and it is an indication that we take seriously the risks that are posed by Iran not just to the United States, but to our allies and to our broader stability in the region.  So it is something that consumes a substantial portion of the national security team’s time and thought and advice to the President.
Q    I’m wondering if you can talk about Jihadi John and what’s next, what’s going to done, and also about the relationship between the U.S. and the U.K. in terms of counterterrorism.
MR. EARNEST:  Well, as you may have seen yesterday, I was asked specifically about the reports that purported to identify that individual.  I’m not in a position even today to confirm or deny those reports, but I am in a position to restate to you our strong commitment to bringing to justice those individuals who are responsible for the murder of American citizens. 
And there continues to be a very active investigation underway right now.  We’re working closely with our counterparts in the U.K. who have been very good partners in this effort, and those efforts continue.  I don’t have a lot of light that I can shed on that investigation.  But as it continues, and if our investigators decide that sharing additional information would be advantageous to their efforts, then they’ll make that decision about whether or not to discuss it in more detail.
Fred.
Q    A follow-up on the big topic from yesterday.  Would you anticipate that Samantha Power and Susan Rice -- either/or -- would be interacting with the Prime Minister during AIPAC?  Maybe some side conferences?  Not necessarily a photo-op per se. 
MR. EARNEST:  I’m not aware of anything like that that’s planned right now, so I don’t think so.
Q    But you wouldn’t necessarily think that they would avoid an interaction?
MR. EARNEST:  No.  I don’t know that they’re going to be there at the same time.  I haven't seen the entire itinerary for the day as it were, in terms of at least the roster of speakers and when they’re going to speak.  But I don’t know of any sort of informal meeting on the sidelines of the AIPAC Convention.
Q    And also, just a real quick one -- would the White House have any comment on the resignation of the U.N.’s IPCC Chairman from earlier this week?
MR. EARNEST:  I will have to -- let me follow up with you on that.  We may have a statement on that.  We’ll get it to you.
Lalit.
Q    On Afghanistan, but on a slightly different issue.  What is the President’s reaction to the celebrations which are going on in Afghanistan right now after the cricket team won their first match in the World Cup Cricket tournament?  It’s usually Australia or New Zealand.
MR. EARNEST:  I’ve heard a little bit about this, some of the news coverage of it.  It is a historic moment for the Afghan people, and we certainly do want to compliment and congratulate them on defeating Scotland in the Cricket World Cup.  I can’t say that I necessarily understand all the rules, but I do understand that they won, and the people in Afghanistan are pretty excited about it.
I do think it reflects that that is a country where they’re starting to stabilize the security situation.  And to have the opportunity to focus on things like an international cricket match I think is a sign of -- at least one sign of some progress that that country is making.
Q    I’m not sure if you know it or not -- the first international cricket match was played in New York between the U.S. and Canada in 1884.  (Laughter.) 
MR. EARNEST:  That’s some good cricket trivia right there.
Q    I have another question on Raj Shah.  He is the highest-ranking Indian American appointed in any administration. He left USAID last week.  How does the President see his role in the last five years in leading USAID?
MR. EARNEST:  Well, I can tell you that Administrator Shah is somebody who performed admirably under very difficult circumstances.  You’ll recall that he was thrust into that job in the immediate aftermath of the terrible earthquake in Haiti.  And since then, he has been dogged in representing U.S. interests around the globe, and trying to meet the needs of people around the globe who are in terrible circumstances. 
And he’s somebody who drew on this own professionalism and leadership, and own expertise; he was a medical doctor, as you know.  And he used those skills and that training to great effect.  And he certainly is somebody who led the agency at USAID extremely well, and we certainly are sorry to see him leave the administration.  But my guess is that, at least for all of us in this room, it’s not the last time we’ve heard of Dr. Raj Shah.
Tamara.
Q    Can we expect to hear from the President at all today about the Homeland Security funding matter depending on what the House and Senate do?  Is there any sort of conversation, plan -- anything we should be waiting for?
MR. EARNEST:  Well, I can say that currently there is no plan for the President to make a public statement about this.  But if we’ve learned anything about the cliffhanger moments in Congress over the last few years, it’s that the unpredictable can happen, and it may necessitate a presidential statement.  So stay close, and we’ll keep you posted.
Toluse, I’ll give you the last one, and then we’ll do the week ahead.
Q    All right, thanks.  I wanted to ask about the sort of back and forth that’s been going on between the White House and Senator Warren on this trade issue.  From her op-ed in The Washington Post, there’s a blog post from the White House that she made some comments to Politico.  Is the White House reaching out directly to Senator Warren to kind of make sure that she feels comfortable with this trade deal?  She seems to be very concerned that it's not in the best interest of the middle class.
MR. EARNEST:  Well, I’ll make a couple of observations about that.  I did not see her comments in Politico, so I can’t react to anything that she may have said.  But I will say a couple of things.  Obviously the administration has and will continue to work very closely with Senator Warren on those areas where we do agree.  And you’ll recall that -- it seems like a long time ago -- but just on Monday, the President appeared at an event over at the AARP headquarters to talk with Senator Warren about the conflict of interest rule that he’s put in place. 
This is a rule that as it goes through the regulatory process, when it's enacted, could stand to save a lot of middle-class families a lot of money from their retirement.  And it's a common-sense rule, it's a rule that is strongly opposed by a lot of Wall Street interests that I'm sure are lawyering up as we speak to try to fight this in the halls of Congress.
But it's something about which Senator Warren feels very strongly and it's something about which the President feels very strongly.  So I think you can continue to expect the administration to work closely with Senator Warren in pursuit of issues like this that have a direct impact on middle-class economics.
But you are asking me about a situation in which there is a little bit of a disagreement about the benefits of opening up access to overseas markets.  The President is determined to ensure that whatever kind of agreement is reached, if we’re able to reach one with countries in the Asia Pacific that it would clearly be in the best interest of American workers, American businesses and the American middle class. 
And what we have asked, even for people like Senator Warren who have expressed at least a little skepticism about the deal, we’ve have asked them to try to keep an open mind; that right now she is being harshly critical of an agreement that has not actually been reached or signed. 
And she certainly is somebody who has her own opinion on these issues, as she should, but this is the case that we’re making to Democrats and Republicans in Congress to take a look at the agreement.  And particularly somebody like Senator Warren who shares the President’s commitment to middle-class economics, I think the President has earned and is entitled to the benefit of the doubt.  Once we have an agreement to show to members of Congress, that if they take a look at the core priorities around which we’re negotiating, that she and others will get a sense that this is what the -- that the President clearly believes this is in the best interest of the American middle class. 
But look, we anticipate that there are a lot of Democrats who are not going to agree with the administration on this.  And so far, Senator Warren has chosen to align herself with that camp, and I think that’s not at all surprising to anybody who has been following American politics over the last few decades.  But it's why we insist on trying to work in bipartisan fashion with Democrats and Republicans to advance trade promotion authority through the Congress.
Q    Does the President have a reaction to the new Congressional Budget Office director that’s been named?  What’s the President’s take on that? 
MR. EARNEST:  Well, I can tell you that the White House continues to believe that the CBO plays an important role in the legislative process, and we value that organization’s objective non-partisan analysis.  So certainly, we here at the White House congratulate Keith Hall in his appointment, and look forward to working with him.  But it is not our practice to comment on congressional personnel decisions.  Even if it sounds like I probably just did.  (Laughter.)
Q    And finally, has the President seen the dress, does he have an opinion as to whether it's white or black?
MR. EARNEST:  I haven’t had an opportunity to talk to him about that, specifically.  But I did compliment my colleague, Jen Friedman, on her white and gold outfit today.  (Laughter.)
With that, let’s go to the week ahead -- (laughter) -- quickly.
On Monday, the President will meet with members of his Task Force on 21st Century Policing to discuss their recommendations on how to strengthen community policing and strengthen trust among law enforcement officers and the communities they serve. 
On Tuesday, the President and First Lady will deliver remarks at the White House about expanding efforts to help adolescent girls worldwide attend and stay in school.  These efforts will build on the investments we have made and the successes we have achieved in global primary school education by elevating existing programs in public and private sector partnerships. 
On Wednesday, Thursday, and Friday, the President is planning to attend meetings at the White House. 
And then, on Saturday, the President and First Lady will travel -- I think as many of you know -- to Selma, Alabama, to commemorate the 50th anniversary of the Selma to Montgomery marches.  This visit will also highlight the President and his administration’s overall efforts to mark the 50th anniversary of the signing and the Voting Rights Act of 1965.  And we’re going to have some additional details about the President’s travel to Alabama early next week. 
So with that, I wish you all a good weekend. 
END

	2:30 P.M. EST
The White House
Office of the Press Secretary
James S. Brady Press Briefing Room
12:32 P.M. EDT
MR. EARNEST:  Good afternoon, everybody.  It's nice to see you today.  Let me do a quick thing at the top and then we'll get to your questions.
Over the course of the day today -- and this is a continuation of activity that has taken place across the week -- the President and his team have worked hard to amplify the middle-class economics theme that was laced throughout the President’s State of the Union address.  And that seems in pretty stark contrast to the priorities that we've seen from Republicans on Capitol Hill over the last few weeks -- from Republican senators getting together and writing a letter to the leader of the Islamic Republic of Iran, or try to play politics with funding for the Department of Homeland Security, or even engaging in an effort to convince governors across the country to not cooperate with our efforts to fight climate change.
The President’s priorities, however, are quite clear and it is focused on an effort to expand opportunity to the middle class.  And that strategy has yielded some benefits already.  We've seen that in the latest jobs report that was released the end of last week that over the course of the last 12 months our economy has created more than 200,000 jobs in each of those months.  That's the first time that we've had a streak like that in 37 years.  And that's an indication that this strategy of focusing on the middle class is paying off.
The point of all this is that we're doing a lot of that today.  This afternoon, the Vice President will be giving remarks at the Hamilton Project Policy Forum at the Brookings Institution on expanding employment opportunities for the middle class.  Also this afternoon, the Director of the Office of Management and Budget, Shaun Donovan, will be delivering a speech at the Economic Club of Washington, D.C.  He’ll be discussing the President’s FY2016 budget proposals and talk about how we can strengthen our middle class and support hardworking families -- while ending the harmful cuts known as sequestration -- that actually strengthen our economy and improve our fiscal outlook.
I'd also commend to your attention an op-ed that ran in the Wall Street Journal also this morning from the Chairman of the Council of Economic Advisers, Jason Furman.  The headline of that op-ed was, “The Ingredients for Getting the Middle Class Back on Track.”
So what you see here is a pretty concerted effort by this administration to prioritize our policies that will expand economic opportunity for the middle class.  And that stands in pretty stark contrast to the priorities that are being displayed by our Republican friends on Capitol Hill.
So with that, Nedra, why don’t you get us started with questions today.
Q    Thanks, Josh.  I’d like to jump to a few issues in the news today and leave the follow-ups to my colleagues here.
MR. EARNEST:  Okay.  I’ll try to keep up.  (Laughter.) 
Q    First, the helicopter crash off the coast of Florida -- is there any indication of what might have caused that?
MR. EARNEST:  Nedra, let me start by saying that the thoughts and prayers of everybody here at the White House are with the families of those who were killed in this accident that occurred, apparently, overnight.  I can tell you that this morning the President placed telephone calls to Major General Joe Osterman and Major General Glenn Curtis.  General Osterman is the Commander of Marine Special Operations.  General Curtis is the Commander of the Louisiana Army National Guard. 
In those telephone conversations, the President expressed his condolences to the families, fellow servicemembers, and communities of the seven Marines and four Army National Guardsmen from Louisiana who were involved in this tragic incident.  The President reassured the commanders of the nation’s deep appreciation for the many sacrifices that our men and women in uniform and their families make to protect and defend our country.  The President also expressed confidence that there would be a detailed and thorough investigation into this incident and what caused it.
Q    And how does the President view the Iranian-backed militias that seem to be taking back Tikrit today?  General Dempsey was, in testimony, expressing concern about whether Iran’s involvement could eventually further destabilize Iraq.  Does the President share that concern?
MR. EARNEST:  Well, first and foremost, it’s important to recognize that this is an Iraqi operation.  This is an operation that was undertaken at the direction of Iraqi military leaders and in consultation with Iraq’s political leaders, including the Prime Minister of Iraq, Mr. Abadi. 
As this military operation was being organized, the Iraqi leadership, as they should, took great care to ensure that this would be a multi-sectarian effort. And we do see the involvement of Iraqi security forces; we also see the involvement of some Sunni forces that are located inside this province of the country.  That’s an indication that there is clear follow-through on Prime Minister Abadi’s commitment to unifying that country, his diverse country, to face down this threat posed by ISIL. 
And a commitment to that unified effort is something that we want to see not just in the political leadership, but also in the execution of this military operation.  And Iran’s involvement in this military operation should not change that in any way.  We have been clear, and Prime Minister Abadi has been clear, that this military operation should not and will not be used as an excuse for exacting sectarian revenge.  The Prime Minister has been clear, and he’s said publicly that the operation should prevent the abuse of civilians at all costs, and needs to abide by international norms, avoid fueling sectarian fears, and avoid promoting the sectarian divides that have actually weakened Iraq over the last several years.
There’s no doubt that this Tikrit operation is a major front in the fight against ISIL, and we are pleased to see that Iraqi forces have been advancing, and we are aware of reports that ISIL fighters are actually withdrawing from the area in the face of this offensive from Iraqi security forces. 
We’ve also seen the pressure that’s being applied to ISIL forces in this area has caused some ISIL forces to even desert their posts.  And there are reports that commanders, ISIL commanders are actually resorting to executing their own troops to prevent them from deserting.  This is an indication of the significant pressure that’s being applied.
The other thing that I would note -- and this is also a welcome development -- is that we have seen the positive input of Grand Ayatollah Sistani -- this is a leading Shiite cleric in Iraq -- who has urged the Shiite militia that’s involved in this operation to act with restraint as they advance.  And again, he is also mindful that this military operation should not be used as an excuse to exact sectarian revenge.
So I guess the point I’m trying to make here is that we are pleased that this operation seems to be advancing.  That’s a positive development.  But we want to continue to make clear that it's the priority of the United States and our coalition partners -- that it needs to continue to be a priority of Prime Minister Abadi and other leaders in Iraq to ensure that this is an operation that advances their efforts to unify that country to take on ISIL.
Q    On the Islamic State AUMF, Senator Corker opened the hearing today by noting that not a single Democrat in Congress has signed on to the President’s proposal.  Is the President doing anything to try to line up support, or does he really feel like this is out of his hands now that he’s made that proposal?
MR. EARNEST:  Well, Nedra, you’ll recall that before the administration even sent language up to Capitol Hill that there were a substantial number of conversations, including at the presidential level, with Democrats and Republicans in the Congress about what language they would like to see included in an Authorization to Use Military Force against ISIL.
We certainly welcome the engagement that we’ve seen from Congress.  The scheduling of this hearing at the Senate Foreign Relations Committee is one example of that engagement.  This ultimately is a legislative process that should be driven by members of Congress to weigh in on this matter. 
The President believes that having Congress participate in this by signaling their support for the President’s strategy to degrade and destroy ISIL would be a positive development; that it would send a clear message to the American people that the country is united, it would send a clear message to our allies and coalition partners that the United States is united behind this strategy, and, just as importantly, it would send a clear message to ISIL and even people who are contemplating joining ISIL that the United States is determined and united behind a strategy to degrade and ultimately destroy that organization.
Q    And finally, we’ve heard now from Secretary Clinton on her emails, and I wonder if you can update us on whether, in addition to her public statements, she’s given any explanation to the President or spoken to him about it.
MR. EARNEST:  I'm not aware of any conversations between President Obama and Secretary Clinton in the last couple of weeks.  Okay? 
Jeff.
Q    I'm going to follow up on the last one that Nedra asked. 
MR. EARNEST:  Okay. 
Q    Is the President or the White House concerned that Secretary Clinton deleted tens of thousands of emails that she would have sent while she was Secretary of State?
MR. EARNEST:  It's my understanding, based on what Secretary Clinton has said, is that she was describing personal emails, and that she went through her personal email system to ensure that all of the personal emails that related to her official role as the Secretary of State were properly transferred to the custody of the State Department, so that they could be properly maintained and archived and actually used in response to legitimate requests from the public and from Congress.  And I understand that the State Department has already taken steps to use that material to respond to congressional inquiry. 
But, frankly, the Secretary’s handling of her own personal email and the maintenance of her personal email inbox is something that I'm not going to comment on and not particularly interested in.
Q    But, I mean, human error could occur when deleting emails.  Isn’t there a possibility that she may have even not deliberately deleted some emails that would have been related to the administration, would have been related to her government job?
MR. EARNEST:  Well, again, I’d refer you to Secretary Clinton’s team for the details on the process that they undertook to review a substantial number of emails, to send 55,000 of them to the State Department to ensure that they could be properly catalogued and maintained and archived, used in responses to legitimate requests from the public.  That’s consistent with the requirements of the Federal Records Act. 
Q    So you’re not concerned about the deletion of other emails that --
MR. EARNEST:  Again, when you describe other emails you’re talking about emails related to her personal business -- at least that’s the way that she has described them.
Q    Deleted the ones that she hasn’t submitted to State, in any case.
MR. EARNEST:  Well, but again, deleted emails that she said were personal in nature and not related to her official work.  And again, it was her responsibility and the responsibility of her team to make that determination and to conduct that review.

	Nobody has marshalled in the evidence that I’ve seen at least to indicate that they have fallen short of what they said they did. But if you have questions about that process you should direct them to them.
Q    You’ve talked about the President’s emailing habits and his address.  Can you clarify, is the email address that he uses a .gov address?
MR. EARNEST:  Jeff, I'm not going to be in a position to talk about the President’s email address, for a variety of reasons, including and related to the security of that email address.
But what I will make clear, as I’ve done on previous occasions -- but you’re raising a -- this goes to an important point, which is the President does take very seriously the requirements that he is under, based on the Presidential Records Act.  That’s different from the Federal Records Act that governs the archiving of records of other government employees.  At the White House, there is a Presidential Records Act in place that has different requirements for the handling of records.  And I can tell you that all of the emails that the President sends are governed by that act and are properly maintained in accordance with the Presidential Records Act. 
Q    All right.  And lastly, on Ukraine.  What does the announcement this morning about the non-lethal aid to Ukraine mean about the President’s decision about lethal aid?
MR. EARNEST:  Well, let’s do the first part first.  There was an announcement from the administration today that an additional $75 million in military assistance would be provided to the Ukrainian military by the United States.  This is a continuation of military assistance that has already been provided by the United States -- some $100 million or $120 million in assistance has already been provided to the Ukrainian military and this is obviously a substantial supplement. 
That assistance includes a wide variety of things.  It includes radios and secure communications equipment.  It includes some unmanned aerial vehicles that can assist in the defense and protection of Ukrainian forces and will significantly enhance their communication and command-and-control capability.  The assistance also includes counter-mortar radars that provide warning and protection against mortar and artillery fire. And it also includes significant medical equipment, including first aid kits, medical supplies and military ambulances.
And I think this is reflective of the partnership that exists between the United States and Ukraine, and is consistent with our commitment to supporting Ukraine as they face this destabilizing threat on their eastern border.
As it relates to the ongoing questions about providing lethal support to the Ukrainian military, we've talked quite a bit, and the President has -- more importantly, the President has talked quite a bit about the consequences of doing that.  The President is continuing to watch the efforts by both sides to implement the agreements that were reached in Minsk, both back in September but also last month. 
And we do continue to have concerns about the commitment of the Russians and Russian-backed separatists to live up to the commitments that they made in Minsk; that there is still evidence that Russian military personnel are fighting alongside Russian-backed separatists.  There continues to be evidence that Russia is continuing to transfer weapons and materiel across the border into Ukraine in support of separatists in eastern Ukraine.  And there are continued reports that Russian-backed separatists are preventing OSCE monitors from getting access to those areas of the country that are necessary to verify compliance with the Minsk Implementation Plan.
So we do continue to have concerns about the commitment of Russia and the Russian-backed separatists living up to that agreement, and that failure on their part only puts Russia at greater risk of facing additional costs.  And it does leave open this question about providing additional military assistance to the Ukrainian military.
Mara.
Q    Just to follow up on that --
MR. EARNEST:  Sure.
Q    I understand that you believe that no matter what kind of assistance you give to the Ukrainians, Russia, if it wanted to, could take over in two weeks.  Do you think that giving lethal aid to the Ukrainian government would cause Russia to do something that they’re not doing now?
MR. EARNEST:  Well, there are a couple of consequences that we have talked about of providing additional lethal military assistance to the Ukrainian military.  The first is that it's likely, I think almost by definition, to lead to greater bloodshed.  And the fact is our engagement here and our support for these ongoing diplomatic negotiations is that we're trying to avoid greater bloodshed.  So that is one thing that the President is mindful of. 
The second is that the President is mindful of the fact that there is not a military solution to this problem; that it is unreasonable to suggest that the United States would be able to provide enough military support to the Ukrainian military that they could overwhelm the military operations that are currently being backed by Russia.
And I guess the third thing is that it could result in some escalation, that if the capability of the Ukrainian military substantially escalates that that could prompt an escalated response by the Russians and the separatists that they back.  And, again, that bloodshed is something that we’re trying to avoid and deescalate.  So the President is very mindful of the potential risk that’s associated with providing additional lethal military assistance to the Ukrainians.
Q    Well, you talk about raising the consequences for Russia if it doesn’t abide by its agreements, which you just said they’re not.  I guess, why not raise the consequences for them or the cost for them by making them take more casualties in their fight with Ukraine?  I mean, that’s what lethal military aid would do.  It would raise the price for Russia to continue to use aggression.
MR. EARNEST:  Well, that is certainly one potential outcome. But, again, the goal here is to get the Russians to abide by generally accepted international norms when it comes to respecting the territorial integrity of another sovereign country.  And we are attempting to engage in a diplomatic process that would bolster support for that generally accepted international norm and deescalate the situation in Ukraine.  And more intense fighting between the two sides would lead to the opposite; would lead to greater escalation and more violence and bloodshed, and a temptation on the part of the Russians to more forcefully resupply Russian-backed separatists.
So, again, those are the risks associated with providing additional military -- lethal military support to the Ukrainians. And these are risks that the President has to weigh against a whole series of other factors. 
And I guess the other point that I want to make here is that there are other costs that can be imposed on Russia aside from just the military toll that could be taken on their forces.  Many of the costs that we’ve imposed thus far have been economic in nature; that by putting in place sectoral sanctions in close coordination with our European partners has had a strong and negative impact on the Russian economy.  There are all sorts of metrics that you can evaluate the devaluation of the Russian currency, the evidence of substantial private capital flight away from Russian markets, substantial downward revisions of Russian economic growth projections.  So there are a lot of ways that costs can be imposed, and the costs that we have imposed thus far have been substantial.  But they have not yet resulted in the kind of change in strategy that we’d like to see the Russian government make. 
Q    So is it fair to say that the diplomatic process and these economic sanctions have not succeeded yet?
MR. EARNEST:  They have not, because we continue to see the Russians act in a destabilizing fashion in Ukraine and continue to fall short of the commitments that they clearly made in the context of their conversations with the Ukrainians, the Germans and the French.  So we do have continued concerns about Russian behavior in eastern Ukraine.  And it is why the potential of increased costs only goes up.
Major.
Q    Would you say, based on what Secretary Clinton said yesterday, to the satisfaction of the White House, this matter is closed?
MR. EARNEST:  Well, ultimately I think it will be up to all of you to make your own determinations about sort of how Secretary Clinton has resolved this matter.  As it relates to compliance with the Federal Records Act, Secretary Clinton and her team say that they have taken all of the personal emails that were related to her official business as the Secretary of State and provided them to the State Department so that they could be properly archived and maintained.
There’s ongoing work there to process those records and make sure that they’re properly stored, to make sure that they can be properly provided to Congress in response to requests.  I know that some of that work has already been done because some of those records have already been provided to Congress.  There also is work underway at the State Department to comply with Secretary Clinton’s request that those emails be made public.  So there’s ongoing work on this matter.
So I guess the fact that people are still working on it might be an indication that this is still going on.  But this is work that we believe is important --
Q    Is the White House satisfied with the answers that Secretary of State Clinton gave yesterday?  And would it consider that approach to emails a model for other Cabinet Secretaries?
MR. EARNEST:  Well, Major, I think we’ve been really clear about the guidance that we have offered to all agency employees, from Cabinet Secretaries on down.  And that guidance has been clarified in recent years, particularly with the President’s signature on a piece of legislation at the end of last year that provided more specific guidelines for how personal email that relates to official business can be properly archived and maintained.  So those guidelines have been made clear, and they’ve been further clarified over the last couple of years as the President has taken steps to do exactly that.
Q    So she would not be a model?
MR. EARNEST:  Well, Major, I think we’ve been very clear about what the guidance is, and that was true last week and it’s true this week, too.
Q    On Ukraine, can we conclude, based on the announcement today, that after repeated requests from the Ukrainians themselves, the publication of a report by people this administration take seriously on defense policy advocating lethal aid to the Ukrainians, that that issue is essentially resolved in the negative; this administration is never going to send lethal arms to the Ukrainians? 
Because it seems, after several months of them lobbying directly, other participants of this administration take seriously and the think-tank community here lobbying for that, and the administration announcing today it will not do that -- it seems very difficult to come up with a set of circumstances in which the administration would come to a different conclusion than it had repeatedly on this question and has again landed on today.  This administration is not going to send lethal arms to Ukraine, is it?
MR. EARNEST:  That’s not necessarily accurate.  The fact is the administration and the entire government continues to watch the situation in eastern Ukraine and continues to monitor Russia’s willingness to live up to the commitments that they made in the context of the Minsk Implementation Plan.
Q    I’m taking seriously the answer you gave to Mara -- and I do.  What condition would change to change what you just described?  Russia will always be more militarily powerful.  The risk of escalation will always be there.  The threat that that would pose to a diplomatic resolution will never go away.  All the things you described in your answer to Mara appear to be baked into this situation.  None of them are going to go away. And I’d be curious if you believed they would go away under a circumstance other than what we have now.  So if all those things are going to stay the same, if they’re all risks that argue against providing lethal aid, can’t you just say this issue is settled?
MR. EARNEST:  I can’t, because the President, I think, in his own mind, is continuing to evaluate the situation in eastern Ukraine and continuing to assess the risk that’s associated with providing additional lethal assistance to the Ukrainian military -- that this is a situation that we continue to monitor.
And we’ve also been clear about the fact that as the Russians continue to fail to live up to commitments that they’ve made that the risk associated with additional costs being imposed on them also goes up.  So there are a number of risk assessments that have to be evaluated.
Q    But when you describe the risks, all on their side of the ledger, what other conclusion could they come to that you’re not going to do this?
MR. EARNEST:  That we’re not going to --
Q    Provide lethal aid.
MR. EARNEST:  The point is, Major, that the costs to them do go up as they continue to -- as these sanctions remain in place, that they have further bite the longer they’re in place.  And that is part of the risk assessment that the Russians themselves are doing.  They themselves have to evaluate, can our economy continue to take this hit as we interfere in eastern Ukraine.
So there is a risk assessment that’s being made on the other side, too.  So I’m not going to prejudge the outcome when we are in a situation where there are a whole set of risks associated with a possible U.S. action, but there are also a large number of risks associated with Russia continuing to move down the path that they’re on right now.
Q    One last thing on Iran.  Is the administration offended by the timing of the Tom Cotton letter or its actual contents?  Because in their defense, Republicans say all we’re saying in that letter is what legislation that other Democrats have signed onto incorporates, which is an idea that at some point, this should be brought to the Congress for its review.  Now, lots of Democrats have signed onto that.  They’ve peeled off in the last week; I understand that.  So is this a question of timing?  Or do you have a genuine sense of offense about the entire concept of Congress reviewing a deal?
MR. EARNEST:  I think based on the reaction that we’ve seen across the country, and based on the reaction we’ve seen from Capitol Hill from both Democrats and Republicans --
Q    That's actually --
MR. EARNEST:  I know, but let me finish.  Based on the reaction that we’ve seen from editorial boards across the country, based on the reaction that we’ve seen from members of Congress in both parties in reaction to this letter, there are a long list of reasons why this letter was the wrong thing to do.
It does come at an inappropriate time; that attempting to sandbag the President of the United States in the midst of negotiations that he’s engaged in not just with Iran but with our international partners is not just unprecedented but inappropriate.  It does undermine the President’s ability not just to conduct foreign policy but to advance our national security interests around the globe.  That’s the first thing.
The other thing that I would say, the other concern that we have -- and again, it’s a long list -- is that this is the wrong strategy; that the strategy that’s being advocated by Senate Republicans is to essentially throw out the window the prospect of trying to resolve the situation around the negotiating table, which means that they are leaving only a military option on the table. 
And what I described earlier this week as a rush to the military option is not consistent with the best interests of American foreign policy.  It certainly is not the way to inspire the confidence of our allies, both in the region and around the world.  And it is consistent with the kind of decision-making that was made in the previous administration that was so roundly condemned and criticized by people all across the country.
Q    -- he says the option is more sanctions.
MR. EARNEST:  And what I have made clear, and what others have made clear, too, is that, A, a deal has not even been produced.  So you have critics of this approach who are criticizing a deal that doesn’t yet exist.  The President himself was on television on your network over the weekend indicating that the likelihood of even achieving a deal was less than 50 percent.  So that’s the other part of the timing of this that is suspect. 
The other thing that I’ll point out -- and again, this is something that has also attracted a lot of criticism -- the signatories to the letter were 47 Republicans.  This isn’t a bipartisan letter.  And I think that on its face is an indication that this is an effort to inject partisan politics into a very serious foreign policy matter, something that the President has identified as one of the most significant foreign policy challenges facing the country right now. 
And I will say that that's also why I was surprised to see that while there may be some Republicans who suggest that the letter was something that was sent on principle, that there are at least two anonymous Republican aides on Capitol Hill who, separately, described the letter as “cheeky.”  And another individual who was described as a top Republican Senate aide indicated that the President -- or that the administration “has no sense of humor about this.”  They’re right; I don't think this is a particularly amusing matter.  We're talking about the nuclear weapons program of an adversary of the United States that on a daily basis violently threatens our closest ally in the region.  So it's not a laughing matter.  And it's not one that this administration takes lightly, despite the comments of some of these Republican aides.
Jon.
Q    Josh, did the White House know that Hillary Clinton was deleting 30,000 emails that she sent as Secretary of State?
MR. EARNEST:  Jon, I can tell you that I was not aware of the personal email habits of the Secretary when maintaining her personal email inbox. 
Q    I'm not talking about her habits while she was Secretary; I'm talking about what she did just a few months ago, which was deleting 30,000 emails that she sent as Secretary of State without anybody determining except for her and her team, and her and her team alone, that those emails didn’t need to be part of the public record because they had determined they were strictly personal.
MR. EARNEST:  Well, again, Jon, this was a decision that was made by Secretary Clinton and her team.  And what we're talking about are emails that she described as personal that relate to what she described as a variety of her own personal arrangements, whether it's her daughter’s wedding or the personal things of that nature. 
So, again, I'd refer you to Secretary Clinton’s team about the decision that they made on that, but, again, we're talking about a decision that she has made related to her own personal email, and that falls outside the purview of the federal government.
Q    Can the White House assure the public that Secretary Clinton deleted only personal email and she didn’t delete any email that would relate to official business?
MR. EARNEST:  Jon, the White House did not review Secretary Clinton’s personal email.  Her team did.  And her team was the one who was responsible for reviewing those emails and making sure that the 55,000 or so of them that related to her official work as the Secretary of State were turned over to the State Department.  And the White House does have an interest in making sure that those personal emails that are related to her official work are properly archived and maintained, that the State Department is properly using them to respond to legitimate congressional inquiries.  And that is what the State Department is doing.
Q    So you have no way of knowing whether or not she deleted official -- emails related to official business?
MR. EARNEST:  The federal government did not review Secretary Clinton’s personal email.  Secretary Clinton’s team did that.  And so if you have questions about the process that they went through to catalog that email then you should direct them to them.
Q    I have questions about whether or not the White House took any steps or has any way of knowing whether or not official records were destroyed.  And I guess the answer is no, you have no way -- all you can do is all we can do, which is take her word for it.  Is that correct?
MR. EARNEST:  Well, Jon, it is not the practice of this administration to review the personal email of federal government employees.  I don’t know of any previous administration that’s done that either. 
Q    Do you know of another employee of this administration that has used only personal email for official business?  Anybody?  Not even a Cabinet Secretary -- do you know of any employee of this administration that has had the same email arrangement that Hillary Clinton had?  I mean, is there a single employee --
MR. EARNEST:  Individual agencies are responsible for maintaining their individual email system. 
Q    But do you know of anybody in this administration that operated the way she did?
MR. EARNEST:  Jon, it is a responsibility of individual agencies to determine how their email records will be maintained and archived.  And so for questions about their email habits, you can certainly consult with individual agencies about the habits of their employees. 
Q    Our friends at the Associated Press are suing because they’ve had a number of Freedom of Information Act requests that have gone to the State Department that have been unanswered.  This President, over and over again, has said that he has the most transparent administration in American history.  Did the State Department live up to that standard under Hillary Clinton of being the most transparent in American history? 
MR. EARNEST:  Well, Jon, I don’t have them in front of me, but I can get you the metrics about the way that this administration has substantially improved the Freedom of Information Act request process, both in terms of the volume of process -- volume of requests that are processed, but also in terms of our track record of making information publicly available that was previously withheld.
Q    I have some numbers here, some metrics for you.  From the State Department, according, again, to our friends at the AP, the State Department takes 450 days to turn over records that it considers complex requests.  That is 30 times longer than what the Treasury Department takes, and seven times longer than how long the CIA takes on similar requests.  Does that live up to the standards of transparency that this President has set out -- 450 days to get an answer?
MR. EARNEST:  I’ll get you some additional metrics about the performance of this administration when it comes to improving the process for making requests under the Freedom of Information Act.
Q    Okay.  But my question is more specific than that.  It’s did the State Department live up to this administration’s -- to this President’s promise of transparency?
MR. EARNEST:  Well, for questions about how the State Department processed their FOIA requests, I’d refer you to them. And I’ll see if there’s some additional metrics that we can provide you on that. 
Q    But my question -- just to be specific, so they’re going to go back from -- my question is not how the State Department did it.  My question is whether or not the White House, the President, is satisfied with how the State Department has done that.
MR. EARNEST:  Right.  But at the root of your question is how the State Department processed those requests, and I’d refer you to them. 
Q    Okay, but it was the President’s promise, it wasn’t Hillary Clinton’s promise. 
MR. EARNEST:  Okay.  Do you have anything else, Jon?
Q    No.
MR. EARNEST:  Okay. 
Alexis. 
Q    I have a couple questions to follow up on the email problem.  As you know, it's been recorded that the Attorney General has three aliases that he uses for email.  And we know that the former EPA Administrator used aliases.  We know that Secretary Napolitano said she never used email.  We know that Secretary Clinton used her personal email.  So my question is a White House question, and that is, to keep up with this tangle, did the White House, through the Chief of Staff or any other official -- the Counsel’s Office -- keep a menu of email addresses so that the White House, the West Wing could communicate with the Cabinet?
MR. EARNEST:  Well, I want to clarify one part of your question.  It’s important for your reporting to reflect the fact that each of those agencies have confirmed that those aliases did not affect the ability of the agency to respond to legitimate congressional requests or legitimate requests under the Freedom of Information Act.  Essentially the lawyers who are responsible for responding to those requests were aware of the proper email address of the Cabinet Secretary and could ensure that those records were searched and produced consistent with the requirements of the law.
And I guess if you’re asking, does the White House know of the correct email address for every Cabinet Secretary, the answer to that is yes.
Q    So the exception to what you just said as way of an answer would be Secretary Clinton, right?  The exception to being able to respond to FOIA requests, Freedom of Information requests, for her was hampered at the State Department because they did not have access to her material, correct?
MR. EARNEST:  Well, but that’s different, because you asked about aliases that existed on government networks.
Q    I know.  I’m asking a follow-up question.
MR. EARNEST:  Okay.  But just for those who are -- there are some key facts that I feel obligated to repeat because they’re not included in your question, and that’s fine, but that’s what I’m going to do.
Q    I’m in a hair-split because you made a generalization and now I want to be specific.  So now we’re getting to Secretary Clinton.  So the State Department could not respond to Freedom of Information requests because they did not possess her material, except for the ones that would have been copied and that they could retrieve from someone else who was a recipient, is that right?
MR. EARNEST:  Which Secretary Clinton described as the vast majority of the emails that she sent as the Secretary.
Q    So as we know, because of the lawsuit that AP and others are contemplating and AP just executed, and because of the pending request, we know that the State Department responded to some of those Freedom of Information requests by saying that they did not have material responsive to the request.  But they did not have the material at all, right?  In some cases, they did not have the material.  So my question to you is, does the President -- is he requesting that the State Department go back and expedite all those pending FOIA requests where they got responses that they did not get material because the material was not in their hands, it was in her server?
MR. EARNEST:  What you’re asking is a legitimate question, but it has to be directed to the State Department.  Ultimately, the request of --
Q    No, I asked about what the President is directing.  Does the President want that?  That’s what Jon is asking you.  Does the President want that?
MR. EARNEST:  And what I’m saying, Alexis, is you’re asking me a very detailed and specific question, but not an illegitimate one, about the State Department’s efforts to fulfill FOIA requests.  And so I’m not steeped in the details of that process. I will look and see if I can get some additional information about it.  But ultimately you’re more likely to get a fruitful answer to this question is you contact the agency that’s responsible for handling it.
Q    Okay.  And I have one other follow-up.  In the summer  -- or when the State Department felt that it wanted to retrieve this information, they executed letters to four previous Secretaries of State, right, for personally possessed material.
MR. EARNEST:  That’s my understanding, yes.
Q    My question to you is did anyone in the White House direct or instruct that those letters be sent out as a way to retrieve that material, or was anyone in the White House at that time consulted about the problem?
MR. EARNEST:  I’m not aware of all the conversations between the State Department and the White House.  I know that responding to FOIA requests and ensuring that these records are properly maintained is the responsibility of the agency and it’s one that the State Department takes seriously.  And I think that’s evidenced by the fact that they sent the letters that you just described.
I would not rule out that there may have been a conversation between a lawyer or two about the fact that those letters were being distributed.  I’m not aware of any of those specific conversations.  And I’m confident that this is a process that is run and maintained by State Department lawyers. 
Q    Can we get any additional information about the communications that went back and forth between the Department and the West Wing about consulting with four previous Secretaries of State?  That’s not a normal thing.  That’s not common. 
MR. EARNEST:  Well, you mean sending letters to other Secretaries of State, or conversations between State Department lawyers and White House lawyers?
Q    For the Department to say, we have this problem, we want to address this problem this way.  Usually there’s conversation that goes back and forth.  You just said that’s possible.  Can we get more information about that?
MR. EARNEST:  I’ll see if I can provide additional information on that.  I’m not going to guarantee, though, that I can provide a lot of insight into conversations between attorneys on this matter or, frankly, any other.  But I’ll see what I can do on that.
Jordan.
Q    Thanks, Josh.  On the ATF shelving its armor-piercing ammo ban, I know last week you called this a common-sense step that could protect law enforcement.  There was a wave of pushback from the gun rights groups.  And I was wondering if that’s what changed the administration’s thinking on this and led to the decision to shelving?
MR. EARNEST:  Well, the decision on this matter was made by the ATF, so I’d encourage you to check with them. 
Q    Well, does the White House have a response to Democrats on the Hill who have accused the administration of caving to pressure from the gun lobby?
MR. EARNEST:  Well, again, the President’s commitment to putting in place common-sense rules that will protect Second Amendment rights, but also prevent those who shouldn’t have firearms from getting them, is as strong as ever.  And the President is committed to that effort, and I think the President’s own personal conviction on this matter has been pretty evident to those who have watched his public comments on this matter. 
But as it relates to this specific decision, I’d refer you to the ATF because it was their decision that was made as it relates to implementing this rule and considering whether or not that balance was appropriately struck. 
Peter.
Q    Josh, does the President and this White House trust Hillary Clinton when she says that of those 30,000 -- I’ll put it even more simply -- does the President trust Hillary Clinton when she says that all 30,000 of those emails were personal, none work related?
MR. EARNEST:  Well, Peter, there has not been any evidence that’s been produced to raise any doubts about that. 
Q    But no one can produce evidence because she deleted them.
MR. EARNEST:  Well, I guess the point is, Peter, that it is the responsibility of a government official, in this case Secretary Clinton, to ensure that all of the personal email that related to her official government work was properly maintained by the State Department.  And that information has been provided to the State Department, and the State Department is doing what they should in terms of ensuring that the information is properly categorized and maintained and provided in response to legitimate requests from either Congress or the public.
Q    So, very simply, does the White House -- yes or no -- does the White House trust that Hillary Clinton did what your expectation is that she should have done?
MR. EARNEST:  And, Peter, the answer that I would say is that there is no evidence that’s been marshaled thus far to demonstrate that there should be a lack of trust in that regard.
Q    Very simply, does the White House consider emails about an employee’s family foundation to be personal?
MR. EARNEST:  Well, again, that is a decision that Secretary Clinton and her team made as they were reviewing the emails.
Q    For any employee.  For any employee that may have a family foundation or a family organization of any --
MR. EARNEST:  So any federal employee that might have one?
Q    There are many others.  (Laughter.)  But the point, very simply put though, is that -- I mean, do you consider a family foundation that deals with other companies that have conversations, interactions with employees of this administration, is that work-related or is that personal?
MR. EARNEST:  Again, you’ll have to consult with Secretary Clinton’s team about her personal emails and the content of them.
Q    Finally, I know you don’t want to speak specific to President Obama’s emails as President, but when he was the U.S. senator from Illinois did the President use a senate.gov address?
MR. EARNEST:  That’s a good question.  I don’t know whether or not he has.  But I know that this is a question that’s been asked of many members of Congress, including some who are making their views known rather pointedly on this topic.   I mean, I did observe that the Chairman of the House Oversight Committee, one of the committees that’s responsible for monitoring this process, has on his official business card a Gmail.com email address. 
So while there are pointed and legitimate questions that have been asked of Secretary Clinton, I think many of those pointed and legitimate questions should be asked of those who are making the most direct accusations in this regard. 
Q    If you can just ask of your boss so we can have the record set of what he used when he was the U.S. senator. 
MR. EARNEST:  Okay.  I’ll see if I can follow up on that. 
Kevin.
Q    Josh, thanks.  Forty-seven GOP senators signing that letter sent to the Iranian leadership -- does the White House consider that a violation of the Logan Act?
MR. EARNEST:  Well, Kevin, I know that this is something that a lot of commentators have speculated on, including some with a lot more legal knowledge than I do.  For a determination like that, I’d refer you to the Department of Justice.  It ultimately would be their responsibility to make that kind of determination.
But, again, I know that there’s been a lot of speculation about this, but I'm not aware of any conversations about the Logan Act and its relation to this specific matter that have taken place here at the White House. 
Q    Secretary Kerry today said that any deal would not be legally binding -- an executive agreement technically would not be legally binding.  Is that the proper read from the White House’s perspective?  And if so, to the American people who would say, well, then what are we doing, what should you say?
MR. EARNEST:  Well, what I would say is that the President will be expecting Iran to make very specific commitments and very serious commitments as it relates to limiting their nuclear program to only peaceful purposes, to coming into compliance with generally accepted international standards for a peaceful nuclear program, and submitting to a historically stringent set of inspections to verify their compliance with the agreement.  So we’re making very specific commitments that Iran will have to make in the context of these conversations.
Q    Well then is it fair to say that some GOP lawmakers, and maybe even Benjamin Netanyahu were right, that any deal could just sort of just go away as soon as the President leaves office?
MR. EARNEST:  No.  The administration has made clear that the whole purpose of these inspections is to ensure that Iran is living up to the commitments that they make in a deal, a deal that at this point has not yet been struck. 
Q    Right.
MR. EARNEST:  But the whole purpose of these historically intrusive inspections is to verify Iran’s compliance with the deal.  And if these inspections -- if Iran doesn’t coordinate or cooperate with the inspections, then the President and the international community would have the opportunity to take a whole range of steps.
If the inspections unearth evidence that Iran is not living up to the agreement, then the President and the broader international community will have a whole series of tools available to them for pressuring Iran, or taking steps to get Iran’s compliance. 
And that’s what’s important about all of this, is that even if a deal is reached -- and again, the President has said that it's less than 50/50 that a deal would be reached -- that even if a deal is reached and we do determine that over the course of a number of years that Iran doesn’t live up to any terms of the agreement, then we’ll be back in the situation that we are right now, which is that we’ll still have tools available in terms of additional sanctions that could be applied on Iran, and we’ll still have a military option at the table if it should come to that. 
The point that the President has made is that any sort of diplomatic opening that we have to pursue to try to resolve our concerns is one that’s worth pursuing because it actually will be more effective than the military option.  The military option is essentially the one of last resort. 
And the other two benefits of a deal that are worth noting here is, currently, the assessment of some experts is that Iran is only -- that Iran’s breakout period is only two or three months away from getting a nuclear weapon.  Now, I call it a breakout period because right now they’re not advancing toward a nuclear weapon, but if they decided to make the decision to go and pursue a nuclear weapon, they could get one in two to three months.  In the context of any agreement, we would ensure that that breakout period was significantly lengthened, that it would be lengthened to about a year. 
The other thing that we would do is by putting in place this historically stringent set of inspections, we would have a lot of access and transparency to Iran’s nuclear program.  And that would put us in a much better position to deal with any effort that Iran made to break out of the agreement and to develop a nuclear weapon.  We’d have more insight into their nuclear program, and we would actually put them farther away from their goal.
So the benefit here is that by reaching an agreement, if one can be reached, is we can put Iran farther away from obtaining a nuclear weapon, we can give the international community greater insight into their nuclear program, and yet we’ll still have all of the tools on the table, including the military option, available to use to ensure that Iran lives up to their commitments.
Q    Lastly, Secretary Clinton, is she the only one to your knowledge, to the White House’s knowledge, that actually had a server among Cabinet members during this administration?
MR. EARNEST:  Well, Kevin, what I have said is that the individual agencies are responsible for maintaining their email systems and for maintaining those records.  I think a lot of you in this room have made calls to agencies to inquire about those agencies’ email systems.  So for questions like that, about how individual Cabinet members handle their email, I’d encourage you to contact the agencies that they lead. 
Byron.
Q    Thank, Josh.  Acknowledging that State Department IT rules are different, could you walk us through what the rules and policies are for White House staffers getting email on their personal device?  Are they allowed to access their personal emails through their government-owned smartphones?
MR. EARNEST:  Byron, I can tell you that here at the White House -- again, thank you for noting that it’s different than individual agencies who are responsible for setting their own rules in this regard.  But here at the White House, we are not allowed to use government BlackBerries or government smartphones to access our personal email. 
I will tell you that at the beginning of the administration we were also not allowed to use our personal smartphones to access government email.  Since the beginning of the administration, though, however -- I believe it was in January of 2012 -- there is software that has been developed and is used by some White House staffers to, again, gain access to their official government email through their personal smartphone.  And there is a way that they can use that software to keep their personal email wholly separate from their work email.  But that is the system that we have in place here at the White House.  But, again, each agency handles this differently. 
Q    Given that the White House has made cybersecurity such a priority and an issue of concern recently, yet seem to have a Secretary of State that was running her own email server at her own home with sort of unknown security, and this is permitted but discouraged under the guidance from what you said, does there need to be different guidance?  Do their need to be stronger rules for dealing with situations like this with high-ranking Cabinet and government officials?
MR. EARNEST:  Well, Byron, a couple things I would say about this.  The first is that we have seen over the years, since Secretary Clinton took office as a Secretary of State, that the guidelines for managing email have been updated and clarified across the administration.  The President has signed a couple of presidential memorandums -- memoranda with language clarifying exactly how these records should be maintained.  And you’ll recall that the end of last year, the President signed into law a piece of legislation that offered clearer guidance for agency employees about how they should ensure that government records created on their personal email can be properly archived and maintained.
So I guess the point is that those guidelines have been clarified since Secretary Clinton first took office.  And what has not changed, however, is this administration’s commitment to ensuring that everybody in the Obama administration lives up to the terms of the Federal Records Act.  And by providing all of her personal emails that relate to the conduct of official business, Secretary Clinton has done that.
Q    The White House has directed a lot of questions about IT rules at the agencies back to the agencies, so it seems there’s not a whole lot the White House knows about the internal IT practices of those agencies.  Can the White House still maintain the claim that it’s the most transparent administration in history, sort of given the questions that have come up about different agencies’ practices and rules?
MR. EARNEST:  Yes.  And the reason for that is that there are a large number of ways in which reporters and the public have access to the administration -- to the decisions that are made at the administration.  And everything from releasing WAVES records -- which is something that the previous administration had fought tooth-and-nail in the court system, that gives you insight into the people that come to the White House complex for meetings -- to trying to make the process of making a FOIA request more efficient, those are just two examples of how the administration has worked to make the federal government and the Obama administration much more transparent.
Q    And one last one.  Did the President email with any other Cabinet members at a private email or a personal email address?
MR. EARNEST:  I haven’t reviewed all of the President’s email, but the thing that I can assure you of is that every email that the President has sent as President of the United States, related to his official work as the President of the United States, has been properly maintained, consistent with the President Records Act.
Laura.
Q    Will the President meet Raul Castro in Panama, when he is going to go to Panama?
MR. EARNEST:  I’m sorry, say that one more time.
Q    Will the President meet Raul Castro when he is going to go to Panama in April?
MR. EARNEST:  I don’t yet know the President’s itinerary for the Summit of the Americas.  I don’t know of any meeting like that that’s planned at this point.
Q    And on ISIS, do you have a reaction to the latest video involving the killing of a hostage and probably two French citizens, among them a kid who is 12 years old killing this hostage?
MR. EARNEST:  Laura, I have seen reports about the video; I haven’t seen the video itself.  But I can tell you that this is an abhorrent and unjustifiable action.  The apparent compelling of a child to execute another individual is but further testament of ISIL’s disregard for all human decency. 
I would note that ISIL chose to broadcast the video at this time that we’re also hearing more and more reports of internal dissent within its ranks.  We’re hearing more reports of individuals being executed for fleeing the front and attempting to defect.  We’re hearing foreign fighters return and tell harrowing tales of the time that they’ve spent with ISIL.  This is indicative of the broader pressure that ISIL is under right now, and that is part of the strategy that this administration has engaged in with our coalition partners.
And whether it’s the success that the coalition had in supporting Kurdish fighters as they took back Kobani, an operation that resulted in about 1,000 ISIL fighters being killed, we understand that those Kurdish fighters are continuing to advance across the countryside in Syria against ISIL.  There are ongoing operations by Iraqi security forces in places like Tikrit, which we mentioned earlier, but also in Fallujah and Kirkuk.  The latter two are locations where Iraqi security forces are being supported by coalition military airpower.
U.S. officials now estimate that ISIL has been rolled back by up to 25 percent of the territory that they previously maintained; that in at least 25 percent of those areas that were previously occupied by ISIL, ISIL forces no longer have freedom of movement in those areas.  And these aren’t just broad swaths of the desert that we’re talking about; we’re talking about populated areas where ISIL had previously essentially ruled.
This is an indication that the “degrade” component of the President’s strategy is working.  And that has led to increased dissension within the ranks.  It has led to ISIL commanders resorting to executing their own fighters to prevent them from deserting their positions.  And we are hearing more and more stories about individuals who return from their fight with ISIL to tell harrowing stories of that experience.  And that is an indication that we’re continuing to apply pressure to ISIL in a way that actually is succeeding in degrading their ability to wreak havoc in that region of the world.
Q    And this morning, Secretary Kerry said that ISIS is al Qaeda -- they just changed the name.  Do you agree with this statement?
MR. EARNEST:  Well, back over the summer when we were talking about why the 2001 AUMF would apply to the military operations underway against ISIL, we noted that ISIL’s roots extend back into al Qaeda, that they share the same ambitions of al Qaeda.  ISIL obviously deploys many of the same tactics that we’ve seen from al Qaeda.  And we have also seen that ISIL has tried to coordinate and even win over the allegiance of some al Qaeda-backed groups.  We saw this latest communication from ISIL talking about how al-Shabaab should align themselves with ISIL.  So that is an indication that we’re talking about groups that do have not just an historical affinity that dates back a number of years but that their ambitions and that their tactics are very similar.
Michelle.
Q    If the Iran issue is so important and so significant to national security and the future, as you’ve described, why not engage in these negotiations on a level that would lead to a treaty or something that is legally binding and that would require a vote in Congress?  Why not that level?
MR. EARNEST:  Well, I’ll say a couple of things about that, Michelle.  The first is, the negotiations that are underway seek very serious and firm commitments from the Iranians and would build in precautions in the form of historically intrusive inspections to ensure that Iran is living up to their commitments.  And to be clear, these are commitments that Iran would not be making just to the United States, but commitments that they would be making to our allies, like France and Germany and the UK, but also to our partners in these negotiations in Russia and China.
This is the international community that is unified as we confront Iran over its nuclear program and seek specific commitments from Iran to verify that their nuclear program is solely for peaceful purposes.  This would be a forceful commitment.  It’s consistent with other arrangements that the United States has used to advance our national security interests around the globe.  An agreement that’s similarly structured allows the United States to work with the broader international community to interdict weapons shipments -- illicit weapons shipments on the high seas.  There are commitments with the same amount of weight that are struck between the United States and our allies, like Korea and Japan, when it comes to basing agreements about keeping U.S. troops on their soil. 
These are agreements that are forceful because they relate to the ability of our men and women in uniform to do their jobs and to do them safely.  So this is an impactful, forceful commitment, and it’s consistent with the way that the President of the United States has advanced the interests of this country for generations now and it is appropriate to this matter as well.
Q    So if that’s enough and that would take care of it, in your view, so that Congress doesn’t need to vote on it --
MR. EARNEST:  Well, this is the one part of my answer that I want to follow up on, which is that the administration, despite the claims that are made by some in Congress, does acknowledge that Congress at some point will, by law, have to vote to remove the statutory sanctions that Congress put in place against Iran.  The real difference of opinion that we have with Congress is that the President does not believe that those statutory sanctions should be removed unless or until Iran has demonstrated over the course of a number of years that they’re actually living up to the commitments that they’ve made with the United States and the international community.
The Congress is suggesting that they should take a vote on these sanctions far earlier in the process, and the President doesn’t think that that’s wise.  The President thinks, frankly, that we should be tougher on Iran than that.
Q    Okay.  And we’ve heard from -- many in Congress have said that the administration hasn’t included them at all in its --
MR. EARNEST:  That is just not true.  There are a large number of conversations that have taken place between senior administration officials and members of Congress in both parties to keep them continually updated on the Iran negotiations.  And this is something that the President and his team takes very seriously.  The President understands that Congress needs to be a partner, and that is why we have gone to great lengths, even in a classified setting on a number of occasions, to keep them updated on the details of our ongoing negotiations with our international partners and the Iranians.
Q    Okay.  And you also were pretty descriptive in what the administration thinks of that letter that was sent.  Is there any indication that it has had an impact or a change on Iran’s view of the negotiations or their commitment going in as they continue?
MR. EARNEST:  Well, I know it’s had an impact on at least the signers of the -- at least one of the signers of the letter.  I saw that Senator McCain just last night said that it was maybe not the most effective thing that they could do.  So it certainly has had an impact at least on some of the individuals who have signed the letter, the reaction. 
We’ve also seen a number of other Republican senators, who had the wisdom not to sign the letter, say things that -- indicate that they didn’t think it was appropriate.  Both Senator Flake and Senator Collins said that.  We saw Senator Corker say that he did not think that the letter was something that was going to help get us to an outcome.  So we’ve seen a lot of Republican criticism of this letter.
We’ve also seen -- and we can get this around -- a large number of editorials from newspapers across the country condemning this letter.  What’s interesting about that is some of these editorial boards have previously been skeptical of the administration’s approach to Iran.  So the point is, it’s not just allies of the administration that are being critical of this letter and those who signed it; it’s even Republicans in Congress and even some editorial boards that have not previously been on our side when it comes to these talks.
But to take your question on more directly, our view of the most direct impact that this letter has had has been on our allies around the globe; that for years, our allies have dealt with the United States of America knowing that when it comes to advancing America’s national security interests around the globe, that that’s the responsibility of the President of the United States. 
And right now, that confidence on the part of our allies in the United States of America has been undermined by the partisan tactics of Republicans in the Senate.  And that is unfortunate, particularly when you’re talking about the generations of credibility that the United States brings to the negotiating table any time the President of the United States, regardless of who he is or has been, is there to represent the United States.  That people understand -- that countries around the world understand and, most importantly, our allies understand that when they make commitments with the executive branch of the United States of America, that they’re making commitments that the country is going to live up to.  And to have that undermined as a part of a partisan tactic by Republicans is damaging.
Mara, go ahead.
Q    Just, is it the White House belief that if this deal doesn’t happen, the sanctions regime -- which up until now has had cooperation from all sorts of people who usually aren’t cooperative, like Russia and China -- would fall apart, or in the Republicans’ view and Netanyahu’s view, the sanctions could just be ratcheted up if this deal doesn’t work?
MR. EARNEST:  Well, this is a good question and here is why:  If the negotiations do not yield an agreement, the international community will step back and evaluate why that agreement was not reached.  The fact of the matter is the United States and our international partners have, as the President described it, made a very reasonable suggestion to the Iranians, which is, if it’s true that your nuclear program only exists for peaceful purposes, then all we’re asking you to do is to comply with generally accepted international standards for that peaceful nuclear program, and submit to a set of very intrusive inspections to allow the international community to verify that.  That should be a reasonable thing if, in fact, it is true that Iran is only interested in a peaceful nuclear program.
If Iran rebuffs that deal, the international community will recognize that the reason that the talks did not succeed is because Iran was being so unreasonable.  And that means that they will support the international community, led by the United States of America, in placing additional pressure on Iran to get them to come to the negotiating table and actually engage in constructive negotiations.
And that is why you’ve heard the President say to our partners in Congress who have said that they want additional sanctions right now -- the President has said, well, let’s see if we can get an agreement by the end of March.  If we can’t, the international community will ascribe that blame to the Iranians, and will work with the United States of America to put additional pressure on Iran in the form of additional sanctions.  And that’s something that the President has said that he will seek.
The concern that exists now -- and this is another way, Michelle, to answer your question -- now this letter from 47 Republican senators accusing the President of not negotiating in good faith with the Iranian leadership, now you might have an excuse for some of our allies or some of our partners like Russia and China to say, well, the Iranians were a little unreasonable, but we saw 47 Republican senators in the United States of America stand up and throw sand in the gears of the diplomatic process, maybe the United States isn’t after all acting in as good a faith as they should to try to reach this agreement.
And that is another risk that’s associated with this letter; that the United States, because of the actions of these 47 Republican senators, does call into question the willingness of this country to negotiate in good faith.  And that would have a very detrimental impact on the success that we’ve enjoyed so far in building a genuine international coalition to confront the Iranians over their nuclear program.
So that has consequences not just for our alliances around the globe, but it actually does have consequences for our ability to resolve one of the most significant foreign policy threats to the United States of America.
Angela, I’ll give you the last one.
Q    Thanks, Josh.  I want to touch on one other topic here -- trade.  With the TPP talks ongoing now in Hawaii, the AFL-CIO came out today and said that they’re going to suspend their PAC donations in favor of using that money to fight the administration’s trade efforts.  Will that make it harder for the White House to find Democratic support on the Hill for a fast track?
MR. EARNEST:  Angela, I had not seen that announcement from the AFL, but I will tell you that it’s not inconsistent with the view that we’ve articulated on a number of occasions, which is that we understand that there are some groups that have traditionally been aligned with the Democratic Party that are very skeptical of any sort of trade deal. 
But the fact is the President has made a firm commitment to both Democrats and Republicans that any sort of trade agreement that he signs on to will be one that he firmly believes is clearly in the best interest of American businesses and American middle-class families.  And that is not going to change.  And there may be some who are so skeptical of any sort of an agreement that they’re not willing to look at the details and will be instinctively and reflexively opposed to these kinds of agreements. 
The President is doing his best to persuade as many Democrats as he can, and some Republicans, to evaluate the agreement once it’s been produced, and to take a look at the details and evaluate for themselves what impact this would have on the country.  And we’re confident that if people do this, it doesn’t mean there’s going to be unanimous support for the agreement; there may be some people who arrive at a different conclusion.  The President, however, will be confident of the benefits that it has for middle-class families.  And the President is confident that a majority of the United States Congress will support it.
But that’s what we’re going to have to prevail upon people to do, which is to take a good, close look at the agreement once it’s been produced.
Thanks, everybody. 
END

	1:42 P.M. EDT
The White House
Office of the Press Secretary
James S. Brady Press Briefing Room
**Please see below for a correction, marked with an asterisk.
12:57 P.M. EDT
MR. EARNEST:  Good afternoon, everybody.  Welcome to the White House on this glorious Monday.  I don't have anything at the top, so we can go straight to your questions.
Darlene, would you like to get us started?
Q    Sure.  Thank you.  I have a couple questions on the report today on the Affordable Care Act -- 16 million Americans signed up since the law --
MR. EARNEST:  Good place to start.
Q    Well, I thought you were going to start with that.  (Laughter.) 
MR. EARNEST:  I considered it, but given the late beginning here.
Q    Given all the positive numbers in that report, why do you think it is that the debate over the Affordable Care Act is not settled?
MR. EARNEST:  I think principally it’s because we've seen tens of millions, if not hundreds of millions of dollars being spent by the President’s political opponents to distort the facts about the true impact of the Affordable Care Act.  So this is money, plain and simple.  And what we have said is that the more that the American people understand the benefits that are associated with this law the more people will approve of it, or at least the more that the approval of this will show up in polls.

	 

	But frankly, we're not concerned about the numbers in the polls.  We're concerned about the numbers that demonstrate the impact of this law.  And whether it's 16 million people being -- uninsured people getting access to health care coverage since the law went into effect, that's a pretty good number.  The decline in the overall insurance uninsured rate dropping 35 percent, that's a pretty good number.  The historically low growth in health care costs since the Affordable Care Act went into effect, that's a good number, too. 
So that's what we're monitoring, and that’s why the President has placed such a premium among members of his team on the implementation of this law.  And we're only building momentum and we're certainly pleased about the progress that we've seen so far.  But there continues to be a lot of work that needs to get done.  And I think probably the best example of that that I can highlight for you is the continued resistance that we've seen in some quarters to the expansion of Medicaid.
There continue to be Republicans across the country who are blocking the expansion of Medicaid in a way that literally prevents individuals in their states from getting badly needed health care coverage that would be 100 percent paid for by the federal government.  And for the life of me, I can't understand why anybody would reach that conclusion.  But some Republicans in this case are quite literally putting their political ambition against the lives of some people in their state.  And that's a shame and that's unfortunate, but it's consistent with the kind of political opposition that we've seen from Republicans to what in many cases is a pretty common-sense implementation of the law.
Q    The report shows that those states that went ahead and expanded Medicaid are doing better in terms of covering uninsured people than those states that haven’t.  Given what you just said about the Medicaid expansion, do you think the report will somehow encourage some of these other states to go ahead and get on board?
MR. EARNEST:  I certainly hope so.  And that's certainly what the data would show, that there is a positive impact on the health of citizens in these states when Medicaid is expanded.  There certainly is a positive impact on health care providers in these states, because *Medicare [Medicaid] ensures that their uncompensated care costs are reduced.  These are -- individuals who don't have access to health care, aren't able to pay their medical bills, automatically those bills are assumed either by the government or by those of us who are paying insurance premiums.  But because of Medicaid expansion, you have a role for the federal government to step in and take care of some of those costs and make sure that these individuals are getting health care before their conditions get too bad.
The other thing that we’re seeing is we’re seeing that the costs to states themselves are alleviated by this as well.  So whether it’s health benefits, benefits for the economy, or benefits for the bottom lines of these state governments, the impact of Medicaid expansion is very positive.
Q    On another subject, we haven’t heard the White House respond yet to Senator McConnell saying yesterday that Loretta Lynch’s nomination may be delayed further.
MR. EARNEST:  Well, it’s certainly a disappointment that after 128 days since being nominated to be the next attorney general that Loretta Lynch, a professional, independent, career prosecutor, has not yet gotten a vote in the United States Senate.  It’s an unconscionable delay.  Ms. Lynch has submitted to more than eight hours of testimony before the Senate Judiciary Committee.  She answered more than 600 written questions from senators, to say nothing of the countless other conversations that she has had in more private settings with individual members of the United States Senate. 
She is somebody who has distinguished herself over the course of her career as a tough, fair, independent lawyer.  She has developed strong relations with law enforcement because of that reputation.  She is somebody who has successfully prosecuted terrorists who targeted the Federal Reserve Headquarters in New York as well as the New York City subway system.  She is somebody who has gone after public corruption and has brought charges against public officials in both parties.  She is somebody who has secured billions in settlements from some of the world’s largest banks who are accused of fraud.  And she has jailed some of New York’s most violent and notorious mobsters and gang members.
So this is somebody with a demonstrated track record of law enforcement who is up for the top law enforcement job in the country.  There is not a single legitimate question that has been raised about her aptitude for this job.  Instead, all we’ve seen is a bunch of political obstruction from Republicans that, again, does not speak well of Republicans’ efforts to run the Senate in an effective fashion and certainly not in a way that’s in the best interest of the country.
Q    Senator McConnell laid out a timeline yesterday that suggests that it could be mid-April at the earliest before her nomination goes to the floor.  Is that a timeline the White House would be willing to accept?  And if not, what is the alternative or how do you get her nomination voted on earlier?
MR. EARNEST:  Look, this is the responsibility of the United States Senate to vote on the President’s nominees.  And as I mentioned before, there has not been a legitimate question that’s been raised about her aptitude for the office.  So the delay is unconscionable; it’s unexplained. 
And the thing that I think warrants mentioning here is you’ll recall that, as I pointed out, Ms. Lynch has been waiting 128 days to get a vote in the Senate.  The reason that that time period has been so long is because the President nominated her back in November for this job.  And at that time, we saw Senator McConnell himself say that Ms. Lynch, A, will receive fair consideration -- I think he’d be hard-pressed to say -- to make the case that he lived up to that promise -- but, B, he also said that her nomination should be considered in the course of -- or, I’m sorry -- should be considered in the new Congress through regular order.
So, essentially, you had Senator McConnell in the position back in November telling the President that he should delay submitting her up to Congress until Republicans were in the majority. 
Now, I’ve gotten asked a number of times since November about whether or not the President trusts Senator McConnell, whether or not Senator McConnell and other members of the Republican leadership -- whether their word is good with the President.  So Senator McConnell, back in November, was saying that her nomination should be considered in the new Congress.  But yesterday, when Senator McConnell was asked on CNN about whether or not he was going to act quickly to confirm her, and to explain the delay, he said the nomination hasn’t taken that long if you consider when it was actually taken up, which was this year.  He continued to say the Democrat majority back in December had a chance to work on the nomination earlier, but decided to delay until this year.  He failed to point out that that delay was at his request.
And now he’s in the position of delaying her nomination even further despite the fact -- and I’ll say it again -- no legitimate question has been raised about her aptitude for this office, despite the fact that she has submitted to more than eight hours of testimony, and despite the fact that she has answered more than 600 written questions.
So there is no question that Republicans are playing politics with the nomination of the nation’s top law enforcement official, and it should come to an end.
Julia.
Q    Thanks.  The State Department is saying after Kerry’s comments over the weekend that Assad should be included in talks to work out negotiations in Syria that they’re still keeping with their same policy, saying that he has to leave.  So what motivation does Assad have to come to the table if he also would have to leave?  And what pressure is being used to bring him into such talks?

	MR. EARNEST:  As the State Department has said -- and I had the opportunity to see some portion of Secretary Kerry’s interview; he was referring to the fact that the Assad regime will have to be at the negotiating table with elements of the moderate opposition to try to broker an arrangement about the political transition in Syria. 

	As far as Assad’s motivation goes, it’s difficult to understand his motivation.  What would cause somebody to drop barrel bombs on innocent civilians?  What would cause somebody to so disrupt the very fabric of their country that he would allow ISIL to run roughshod over significant portions of the country that he’s supposed to be governing, and slaughtering some of the citizens that he’s supposed to be serving?

	So I have a difficult time trying to speak to his motivation.  What I can tell you is the United States is going to continue to work actively with the international community to try to bring about some resolution to the political situation in Syria.  But what is, I think understandably, at the top of our priority list is dealing with the threat that is posed by extremists who are capitalizing on the chaos inside Syria right now.  There is no question that Assad is responsible for that chaos.  It’s a reflection of his failed leadership that we see extremists who are attempting to establish Syria as a safe haven to carry out acts of terror around the globe, certainly around that region.  And that’s why you’ve seen such a vibrant international response.  And ultimately, all of this rests at Assad’s feet. 

	And we are optimistic that as we move forward we’re going to be able to succeed in working with the international community to limit this threat, to degrade and ultimately destroy ISIL as an organization, to take out other extremists that may be operating inside Syria, and hopefully, that once we’ve been able to make some progress as it relates to the security situation, we can also make progress on the political situation inside Syria, too.

	Q    Okay.  And on the cyclone that hit many South Pacific islands, we haven't heard from the President on that.  What’s his response, and is he going to offer any kind of aid?

	MR. EARNEST:  Well, let me start by saying that we offer our condolences to the people of Vanuatu, Tuvalu, the Solomon Islands, and Kiribati as they cope with the devastating impact of Cyclone Pam.  Our thoughts and prayers are with the victims and their loved ones.

	In the wake of this cyclone, the United States government immediately issued disaster declarations from our U.S. embassies in the region.  And we’re working closely with our NGO partners and other nations in the region on the most effective ways to deliver our relief response.  The USAID has sent an assessment team to Vanuatu to coordinate our response.  So for details on that ongoing effort I’d refer you to USAID and to the Department of Defense that often can provide logistical support in these kinds of situations.

	Justin.

	Q    I wanted to circle back on the Lynch nomination first.  Mitch McConnell said that the reason that he’s holding it up is this human trafficking bill.

	MR. EARNEST:  I saw that, too.

	Q    Eric was asked about it last week and he didn’t really weigh in from you guys.  And so what I’m wondering is whether you guys have a position on whether the bill should be passed as is.  And specifically, there’s been a lot of controversy over an anti-abortion provision in the bill, whether that’s something that you guys would veto were it to pass the Senate.

	MR. EARNEST:  Well, Justin, right now it doesn’t have the votes to pass the Senate.  Over the course of last month, we spent a lot of time talking about the efforts of congressional Republicans to pass funding for the Department of Homeland Security, and I observed at the time it was difficult to think of a more common-sense measure that should be able to earn bipartisan support in the United States Congress than funding for the Department of Homeland Security.

	Well, sure enough, a month later, I think I’ve found a more common-sense measure that Democrats and Republicans should be able to get together to support, and that is an effort to concentrate federal resources to stop child sex trafficking.  But you’ve got to hand it to Republicans that they’ve taken even a measure as common sense as that and turned it into a partisan controversy.

	That is not a reflection of a flaw in the bill, it’s a reflection of inept leadership; that surely, Democrats and Republicans should be, in regular order, able to work together to advance legislation that would allow us to concentrate our efforts to focus on and crack down on individuals who seek to traffic in children.  But yet, Mitch McConnell and Republicans in Congress have succeeded in turning this into a partisan controversy.

	And again, I also noted last month that Speaker Boehner and Leader McConnell got together the day after the election and they wrote an op-ed in the Wall Street Journal.  The headline of the op-ed was “Now We Can Get Congress Going.”  Well, hopefully, Leader McConnell can get Congress going on passing a piece of legislation that would stop child sex trafficking.

	Q    Well, how are they turning it into a partisan issue?

	MR. EARNEST:  Hold on.  Justin, you have anything else?

	Q    You can --

	MR. EARNEST:  Okay. 

	Mara, go ahead.

	Q    How are they turning it into a partisan controversy?

	MR. EARNEST:  Well, right now you’ve got a whole bunch of Democrats on the other side of the aisle saying they’re not going to support it because of a provision that Republicans have inserted in this widely supported bill.  So again, if Republicans are going to be in a situation where they want to -- to use their words -- “get Congress going,” surely, they should be able to find a way to build bipartisan support for a bill that is going to counteract child sex trafficking.

	Q    Why isn’t that just Democrats and Republicans having their usual partisan difference over abortion?

	MR. EARNEST:  Well, because you have a situation in which you have the Republican majorities setting the tone for what bills are going to come to the floor and what bills are going to be voted on and what bills are going to be passed.  So the fact that Leader McConnell can’t build bipartisan support for a child sex trafficking bill I think is an indication that his leadership here in the majority is not off to a very strong start.

	Q    I just had two quick ones.  There’s a hearing this week in the Senate on the crude oil export ban.  This is something that you guys have said that you’re looking at before, and also, the idea here is that it would fund the Highway Trust Fund, which is obviously a priority for the President.  So I’m wondering, has that evaluation process moved on at all?  Do you have any feelings on whether or not you’d support this legislation?

	MR. EARNEST:  I don’t have any update in terms of our position on this.  These rules and regulations are administered by the Department of Commerce, so if there’s any change, it will be announced over there.

	And as it relates to investing in infrastructure, we’ve put forward what we believe is the best way to do that.  That is closing loopholes that only benefit wealthy and well-connected corporations, and using that money to invest in the kind of infrastructure that everybody benefits from.  So we believe that that’s the best way to invest in our infrastructure.  But if there are other ways that members of Congress have for trying to fund those efforts, then we’re open to considering them.  But as it relates to this specific change, I’d refer you to the Commerce Department.  There is no change in our policy at this point.

	Q    And then one last one on Israel.  Prime Minister Netanyahu said earlier today that if he were to be reelected, that he didn’t envision the creation of a Palestinian state during his time in office.  I was wondering if you guys had a reaction to those comments.

	MR. EARNEST:  Justin, you've observed that I have worked assiduously to avoid commenting on the claims made on the campaign trail by American politicians.  That rule, at least in this case, applies to Israeli politicians, too.
Q    Well, this one, I mean, obviously has a pretty severe foreign policy implication for your guys’ hopes.  It’s been a central kind of public -- Secretary Kerry and his time in the State Department.  So --
MR. EARNEST:  Well, it is true that our policy is that we believe that the situation should be resolved with a democratic and Jewish state of Israel living side by side in peace and security with a sovereign and contiguous Palestinian state.  That is our policy.  That is something that we are going to continue to work with the international community to achieve diplomatically. 
We believe that a resolution along the lines of what I just described is clearly in the best interests of the Israeli people, our closest allies in the Middle East, but it also happens to be in the best interests of the Palestinian people, as well.  And that's why we have worked with other countries around the world to try to reach this outcome, and that continues to be our policy.
Q    Would the election of an Israeli prime minister who did not share that goal be a setback or a problem for that process?
MR. EARNEST:  Well, again, the Israeli people will be responsible for choosing their next prime minister, and they’ll have that opportunity as early as tomorrow.
Jon.
Q    You promised to April.
MR. EARNEST:  Okay.  I’m sorry, April.  I get confused with the whole Mara-Justin thing.  (Laughter.)   
Q    I mess it all up.  (Laughter.)
Q    Okay, it’s okay.  (Laughter.)  So, Josh, I want to go back to the issue of Loretta Lynch.  And you just said it was unexplained and unconscionable for this delay.  But Democrats on the Hill are saying that her confirmation hearing is being held up, she’s being a political pawn and she’s being held up for this trafficking issue.  What do you say about that?
MR. EARNEST:  Well, again, Ms. Lynch was nominated 128 days ago.  That is ample opportunity for the Senate to perform their responsibility to evaluate her candidacy for this job.  And the fact is no one in that 128 days has raised a legitimate concern about her aptitude for the job. 
The fact is she is an independent career prosecutor who has a long track record of success that spans three decades or nearly three decades.  She is somebody who has been previously confirmed by the United States Senate to serve at the United States Attorney for the Eastern District of New York.  In that role, she successfully prosecuted terrorists.  She successfully prosecuted gangsters and mobsters. She successfully prosecuted white-collar criminals in New York.  She is somebody with a strong track record, and it’s what has earned her the strong support of law enforcement. 
So there is no good reason that she has not been confirmed. I guess the one thing that differentiates this situation from the DHS funding situation is that if Congress didn’t act on funding for the Department of Homeland Security, then it would raise concerns about the Department of Homeland Security to plan for the future, to be able to pay their employees.  In this situation we have the current Attorney General who is serving in office, and while this delay is unconscionable and I think very difficult for anybody on the Republican side to explain, we do take some solace in the fact in knowing that we have a very aggressive, a very capable Attorney General in Eric Holder who remains in that office, and is getting up early and is working late, and using every authority that he has in that office to do the right thing for the country.
Q    Do you agree with other Democrats, again, on the Hill who are saying that she’s a political pawn?  Her vote, her confirmation vote is being held up because McConnell is upset because trafficking did not happen when it was supposed to happen.  Do you agree with the Democrats?  Does this White House agree?
MR. EARNEST:  Well, again, I think I’ve described the scenario that I think is going on up there, and it’s unconscionable that a career prosecutor with a track record like this would be treated this way by Republicans in the Senate.
Q    What’s the plan B?  The vote is so close, it’s very tight.  What’s plan B?
MR. EARNEST:  There is no plan B.  This is a career prosecutor who deserves strong bipartisan support, and she should get it.
Q    All right, and one more question.  On ACA and the numbers of -- the decline in the numbers of African Americans and Latinos who are uninsured.
MR. EARNEST:  Sure.  That’s the other aspect of the report that Darlene referred to at the top, that the decline in the uninsured rate that we saw after the implementation of the Affordable Care Act is something that has been true across all race and ethnic groups as well.  So the overall decline in the uninsured rate has been from a little over 20 percent to just above 13 percent. 
We’ve seen an even larger decline in the African American community, that the decline has been 9.2 percentage points.  That has allowed 2.3 million Americans to gain coverage.  In the Hispanic community, the improvement has been even more substantial.  The uninsured rate has dropped 12.3 percentage points, and 4.2 million Americans have gain coverage.
So we’ve very pleased about the impact that this has had in expanding coverage for more Americans.  That’s good for the health care of these individuals, obviously.  It’s also good for the bottom line of state and local governments.  And it happens to be good for our economy as well.
Jon.
Q    Just a quick follow first on Loretta Lynch.  You do have a plan B in that Attorney General Holder has said he would stay on.  Is there any limit to how long he’s willing to stay?
MR. EARNEST:  Well, Attorney General Holder is a dedicated public servant and he is somebody who has been extraordinarily effective in the office of the Attorney General and using the authority of that office to keep the American people safe and to protect their civil rights.  And he’s going to keep doing that as long as --
Q    As long as it’s necessary.
MR. EARNEST:  -- as long as it’s necessary.  And look, he is somebody who has a reputation for his work ethic.  So he’s getting up early in the morning, he’s staying late at night, and he’s doing everything that he can do while he’s in that office to protect the American people.
Q    I understand.  He works hard.  Do you find it a little ironic that the effect of the Republican delay on Loretta Lynch is to keep Attorney General Eric Holder, somebody Republicans in the House held in contempt, to extend his term as Attorney General?
MR. EARNEST:  Well, that’s an interesting observation.  I will tell you that despite his work ethic, I think Attorney General Holder is looking forward to the day when he can hand the keys to that office to Ms. Lynch.  She is an extraordinarily qualified nominee.  And while he is dedicated to his job and he’s going to work hard at it, he’s also looking forward to the day when she’s going to take that office.
Q    So, on Iran, you’ve suggested to us repeatedly that the end of the month deadline was a real deadline, with the possibility of extending it is pretty remote, that it’s either going to happen or it’s not going to happen.  Would you really walk away from these talks if there is no deal by the end of the month?  Or do you now see the possibility that it could be a slight extension?
MR. EARNEST:  Well, Jon, I think the President has spoken to this, so I’d encourage you to look for the words that he used.  But I can characterize them as we’ve been negotiating for more than a year, and the President and our international partners who are participating in this negotiation have been very clear about what our expectations are -- that we want to have resolution to the idea that Iran will come into compliance with the international expectations about their nuclear program and take the extraordinary step of submitting to historically intrusive inspections to verify their compliance with the agreement.
That is the best way for us to resolve the international community’s concerns with Iran’s nuclear program.  And that’s what will be part of a deal -- essentially, shutting down every path that Iran has to a nuclear weapon and allowing intrusive inspections to verify their compliance with the agreement.  And if that’s not something that Iran is able to agree to after more than a year of negotiations, then, yes, the President and our international partners will walk away will seek to ratchet up the pressure on the Iranians.
But the fact of the matter is those negotiations are still underway and we should allow the negotiators the two weeks that remain to try to hammer out that political agreement.  Now, what we’ve also said is that there are a lot of i’s to be dotted and t’s to be crossed in terms of the technical annexes, and we would expect for that to take a couple of more months, probably until the end of June.
Q    Well, you’d have a second deadline for the details.  But you still think in terms of the general framework agreement that the end of March is the real deadline and we’re highly unlikely that we see an extension?
MR. EARNEST:  I mean, again, Jon, we’ve been doing this for more than a year and the President -- despite our commitment to protecting the confidentiality of the negotiations, we’ve been publicly clear about what our expectations are.  And these are expectations that are not just held by the President; these are expectations that are held by our international partners as well.
Q    How is this done, by the way, when you have a deal?  Is there going to be a big ceremony?  Are we going to see a handshake?  I mean, what happens when this deal is done?  What’s the choreography of it?
MR. EARNEST:  I don’t have a good sense of that.  But I do know that the administration, as the Chief of Staff indicated in his letter to Senator Corker over the weekend, is committed to sharing information with Congress, as we have throughout this process, about what that deal looks like.
Q    And then just one question on emails -- and I’m going to go beyond Hillary Clinton’s emails here.  You saw late last week we learned that the State Department actually hadn’t been routinely saving State Department emails.  I’m not even talking about Hillary Clinton’s emails -- State.gov emails.  The Inspector General said that they have a special program for choosing which to be saved, that only about 60,000 out of 3 billion in 2011 were saved.  Are you concerned?  And I know you’re going to tell me this is up to the State Department, this is up to the agencies.  But, I mean, if you have a situation where you have one of your departments routinely not preserving their emails, as clearly required by law, I would think -- wouldn’t there be an interest in the White House of kind of taking a look, having an independent look at this and say, fix this mess?
MR. EARNEST:  Well, let me say a couple of things about that.  Let me slightly quibble with the premise of your question, that I think that the precise way to describe this is -- and the State Department has acknowledged this -- that they did not have a system in place to automatically save the emails.  There is some evidence to indicate that at least some State Department employees were routinely saving their emails.
Q    Yes, but a pretty small percentage, though.
MR. EARNEST:  The point is that we do know that thousands of them have been provided to Congress in response to inquiries from Congress.  But, look, what the State Department has also indicated is that they are seeking to update and improve this process and they’re working with the National Archives and Records Administration to institute a process that would make it automatic that those emails are saved and that is what they should do.
Olivier.
Q    I’ve got a couple for you.  First, the upcoming Afghanistan summit -- I asked you before whether Pakistan would have a seat at the table and I want to circle back on that.  And then I want to ask you whether the President is going to use this summit to announce any changes to the timetable of the American withdrawal.
MR. EARNEST:  Olivier, I still won’t have much information to share about possible Pakistani involvement in these talks.  If we get greater clarity about that we’ll share that information with you.
As it relates to the President’s strategy for reducing our military footprint in Afghanistan, I can tell you that the President, as has been publicly reported, has been closely consulting with his national security team and with his commanders on the ground, as he has over the course of the last several years that this strategy has been executed, about the proper pace of that military drawdown.  We do have military personnel that continues to serve in Afghanistan.  They are there both to carry out some counterterrorism missions that don’t just protect the American people but also protect the military personnel in Afghanistan.  They also are engaged in an effort to train and advise and support Afghan security forces as they have taken security responsibility for their country.
The President and our military take very seriously this partnership that the United States has with Afghanistan, and the President will listen carefully to the advice that he is getting from his national security team and his military commanders on this matter -- that is the pace of the drawdown.
What I can tell you continues, however, to be a firm part of the strategy is that by the beginning of 2017, the President envisions a scenario where our military presence in Afghanistan has been further and substantially reduced to a Kabul-centric presence that’s focused on protecting the embassy and is focused on some of the military coordination and cooperation that I described before.  And that would represent a substantial drawdown in the number of troops then from what our presence looked like even just a couple of years ago.
Q    And finally, there’s a news report out there that the White House is getting advice on how to take on the Islamic State from former General David Petraeus.  I’m wondering if you can confirm that.
MR. EARNEST:  Well, Olivier, obviously, General Petraeus is somebody who served for a number of years in Iraq.  He commanded a large number of American military personnel in that country.  Over that time, he developed strong relationships with some of his Iraqi counterparts and with some of Iraq’s political leaders.  He is, I think, legitimately regarded as an expert when it comes to the security situation in Iraq, so I think it makes a lot of sense for senior administration officials to, on occasion, consult him for advice.
Q    And any particular security precautions that you take in this situation, given his legal entanglement?
MR. EARNEST:  Not that I’m aware of.
Bill.
Q    Is it the position of the administration that Congress cannot change an executive agreement of the type that is contemplated in the Iranian nuclear negotiations?  This references the letter from Congress. 
MR. EARNEST:  Well, it is the position of the administration that it is the proper role of the President of the United States to represent the United States in the international community, and to advance our national security interests around the globe.
And what has been true of this President and every President that has come before him is that they have used that authority that is given to them under the Constitution to execute broad executive agreements with other countries.  These take a wide variety of forms, but many of them have substantial consequences for American national security.  This is everything from basing agreements with our allies to even the agreement that this administration reached with the Syrians and with the Russians to dispose of Syria’s declared chemical weapons stockpile.
Q    So you’re saying that, contrary to what members said in the letter, that an agreement could not be reversed by the next President?
MR. EARNEST:  Well, what we are saying is that it would be hard to imagine that if Iran were living up to the terms of a good agreement that we have reached –- that is assuming that we are able to reach an agreement -- but if we are able to do so, it’s difficult to imagine another President coming into office and reversing all of that progress in the face of the international community when we have actually found a way to ease the international community’s concerns about Iran’s nuclear program.
So, again, if Iran is living up to this agreement, then it’s hard -- I think it would be hard to explain why another President would come in and back out of it.
Q    Well, still, that’s not the same as saying he couldn't do it.
MR. EARNEST:  No, I recognize that it’s not the same.
Q    Well, one other thing.  Does anybody in the White House have any knowledge as to whether to two Secret Service agents involved in the incident earlier in the month were under the influence of alcohol at the time?
MR. EARNEST:  I’m certainly not aware of that, Bill.  But I know that this is an issue that is being investigated by the inspector general at the Department of Homeland Security.  And so for questions about their inquiry, I’d refer you to that office.
Q    You’re saying you don’t know?
MR. EARNEST:  I’m saying that I don’t know, but it is being investigated by the inspector general at the Department of Homeland Security.
James.  Nice to see you today.
Q    Josh.  Thank you, nice to be here.  Just on Iran first --
MR. EARNEST:  Yes, sir.
Q    Can you confirm that in the most recent dialogues taking place amongst the P5+1 in Iran that a representative from Iran actually cited the Cotton letter and raised that as an issue during the discussions?
MR. EARNEST:  I’ve seen some of those reports.  I’m not going to be in a position from here to discuss the confidential negotiations that are currently underway in Switzerland, so I’m not in a position to confirm that.
Q    Without asking you to do that, are you in a position to tell us whether or not, in some form or fashion, the Cotton letter has served even in some appreciable way to damage these talks?
MR. EARNEST:  Well, James, what we have said about this is that our biggest concern is about the signal that it sends to our allies that by having this partisan letter out there, a letter that was signed by 47 Republican senators, it might -- and I think understandably -- would raise questions in the mind of our allies about whether the United States can live up to agreements that we make about whether or not we can live up to international agreements that we make.
Q    But apart from whatever signals it may or may not send to our allies, the question put to you here is whether you have any evidence that the Cotton letter is already doing some kind of appreciable damage to the talks themselves.
MR. EARNEST:  Well, based on the fact that many of our allies are involved in these conversations, I can certainly stipulate that we do not believe that this letter was helpful to the process and it did seek to undermine the President’s ability to engage in these negotiations.  That was, after all, a stated goal of the senators who signed the letter in the first place.
Q    Is it the position of the administration that in order for the P5+1 talks to reach a successful outcome, the parallel track between Iran and the IAEA, which concerns longstanding questions unresolved about Iran’s work in the possible military dimension, must also be successfully resolved?
MR. EARNEST:  Well, James, what we have indicated is that we’ve got these very specific concerns about Iran’s nuclear program that we want to see resolved that specifically would shut off the four pathways to obtaining a nuclear weapon.  That would be augmented by a historically intrusive set of inspections to verify their compliance with the agreement.  We would envision a scenario where the experts at the IAEA would be involved in conducting those inspections to verify their compliance.
But even if an agreement is reached, it will not resolve all of the wide variety of concerns that we have with the Iranian government’s behavior.  And that includes some of the behavior from their military.  It includes some of their menacing of our ally in Israel.  And it includes the unjust detention of some American citizens behind bars in Iran.
Q    So the answer is, no, the IAEA-Iran track does not have to be successfully resolved in order for the P5+1 track to reach what you regard as a successful outcome?
MR. EARNEST:  But it does not mean that all of our concerns would go away.  The concerns that have been raised by the IAEA would continue to be concerns that we would take seriously.  But we’ve been very clear about what the scope of this agreement is, and if we are able to reach an agreement, it certainly would not ease the long list of other concerns we have about the behavior of the government of Iran.
Q    Just quickly on Kerry, and then I have one question about the emails controversy.  If I understand the position of the administration correctly following Secretary Kerry’s remarks this weekend, it is that President Assad should report to some mutually convenient negotiating table for the presence of ending his own rule in Syria, correct?
MR. EARNEST:  No.  What Secretary Kerry was saying is that he does believe that it’s appropriate for representatives of the regime to sit down with members of the moderate Syrian opposition to try to make some negotiated decisions about the political transition in Syria.  Secretary Kerry was referring to Assad as essentially a proxy for the regime.  He did not envision a scenario where Assad would himself participate in those conversations.
Q    Lastly, on the emails controversy, a published report over the weekend in a leading New York newspaper asserted that White House counselor Valerie Jarrett played some role in the disclosures about Secretary Clinton’s emails.  Can you confirm that?
MR. EARNEST:  It’s utter baloney.
Chris.
Q    I’ll leave it there. 
Q    Very specific answer.  Let me ask you, if I can go back to the letter, does the White House see, in terms of their concern about the impact, an appreciable difference between that and Democrats who have come up very publicly in support of review power over the nuclear deal?  What’s the level of concern about the message that sends?
MR. EARNEST:  Well, speaking of baloney, there are a number of members of Congress who have --
Q    Do we speak of anything else?  (Laughter.)
MR. EARNEST:  Maybe other cold cuts for tomorrow’s briefing.  (Laughter.) 
Q    Corned beef tomorrow.
MR. EARNEST:  Exactly.  We’ll do that. 
There have been a number of members of Congress who have repeatedly attempted to suggest that the administration does not envision a role for Congress in consideration of a deal that is reached with Iran if one is reached.  And we have said from the beginning that the only way that the sanctions regime that Congress has put in place against Iran can be removed is if Congress votes to remove them. 
What’s also true, however, is that when Congress passed legislation to put these sanctions into place, they included in that legislation presidential authority to waive some of those sanctions temporarily if the President concluded that it would be in the best interest of the country. 
Now, the reason that waiver authority is beneficial is it means that if we determine that -- well, there are two reasons.  One is, we do not envision a scenario where we would want to automatically, once Iran has signed on the dotted line -- if they sign on the dotted line -- we do not envision a scenario where one of our most powerful weapons against them is immediately taken off the table.  What we could envision is a presidential effort to slowly relax them in exchange for Iranian compliance. 
The benefit of that is, if we determine that Iran is not complying with the agreement, then we can snap those sanctions back into place with the stroke of a pen.  Within a day, those sanctions can be quickly put back into place.
Now, the other thing, though, is that surely Iran would want the certainty of seeing those sanctions not just waived, but totally removed.  And the negotiating point here is the administration believes that in order to keep pressure on Iran to ensure they live up to the terms of the agreement that we should keep those sanctions in place for a while, and that after Iran has demonstrated a commitment to complying with the agreement -- not just over the course of days, not over the course of weeks and not over the course of months, but over the longer term -- has demonstrated a willingness to comply with the agreement, then Congress could take what would be the reasonable step of considering whether or not those sanctions should be removed.
But for now, and certainly in the early days of an agreement, if one is reached, the administration believes we need to keep pressure on Iran and we should keep those sanctions in place, which is why we don’t believe that Congress should vote on this right away.
Q    Is there any concern about 60 days to approve or reject any bill?
MR. EARNEST:  Well, something like that would have the effect of raising questions in the minds of the Iranians about whether or not, when the President reaches an agreement with them -- if we’re able to reach an agreement -- about whether or not our commitment is good.  We can’t have a situation where you have some people in the Congress backseat-driving.  What we need is, we need the support of Congress, as we have enjoyed all along in continuing to consult with the administration as the talks are ongoing.  And we absolutely -- again, to get back to the baloney -- we absolutely do believe that there is a responsibility for Congress, after Iran has demonstrated sustained compliance with the agreement, to weigh in and make a decision about removing those sanctions.  But again, they should not do that until Iran has demonstrated over the long term compliance with this agreement.
Q    If I can go back to Loretta Lynch for a second.  Did the Democrats make a mistake in not pushing for a vote on her last year?
MR. EARNEST:  Well, the President, in an effort to try and find some good faith with incoming Senate Majority Leader Mitch McConnell, acceded to his request to allow the new Senate to consider her nomination. 
But as I mentioned earlier, I get asked a lot about whether or not Senator McConnell is a man of his word and whether or not he’s lived up to commitments that he makes to the President of the United States.  And for him to suggest that, well, it hasn’t been that long because Senate Democrats delayed in introducing her until after the first of the year, that’s not a very good sign of faith.
Q    You mentioned the inept leadership you thought that this represented.  And as you well know, McConnell has suggested that it was the Democrats on the Judiciary Committee who unanimously vote for the trafficking bill to send it out; that suddenly it’s sort of a doubling back by the Democrats, rather than Republicans who are using this to delay.  Why did they all vote for it if they had trouble with the wording?
MR. EARNEST:  Well, again, you’d have to ask Senate Democrats about what their position is.  My understanding is they have serious concerns about the inclusion of this controversial element of what is otherwise a common-sense piece of legislation to try and stop child sex trafficking.  So this is a common-sense piece of legislation.  I don’t really understand why the Senate Majority Leader wouldn’t say to himself, if there is some objection that somebody has to this common-sense bill, let’s remove the objection so we can get it passed and get it signed into law.  This is a worthy goal and this is a worthy effort to try to focus the efforts of the federal government and our law enforcement resources on ending child sex trafficking.  But again, that’s going to require somebody to demonstrate some leadership in the Senate.
Q    And saving the most important for last:  When can we expect the President’s bracket?  Has he filled it out yet?  (Laughter.)
MR. EARNEST:  He has not yet, but I would anticipate you’ll see it before tipoff on Thursday morning.
Jim.
Q    Was the President pleased to see Vladimir Putin resurface?  (Laughter.) 
MR. EARNEST:  I haven't talked to the President about the reappearance of President Putin.
Q    Did the White House have a way to get in touch with the Russian President if it needed to during this time when he was out of the public eye?
MR. EARNEST:  I’m not aware of any efforts to contact President Putin while he was not in the public eye over the last week.
Q    Getting back to Syria.  Does the President still believe that Assad should go?
MR. EARNEST:  Absolutely.  That continues to be the policy of this administration.  It is because of President Assad’s failed leadership that we’ve seen the chaos in Syria that has allowed ISIL to flourish.  It is because of the chaos fomented in Syria by Assad’s failed leadership that there are other extremist groups that are seeking to establish a safe haven inside Syria and strike targets in the West and around the globe.  So we absolutely hold Assad responsible for that.
We certainly hold him responsible for the atrocities that he and his military have committed against the Syrian people.  And it is why we continue to believe that he has lost the legitimacy to lead that country.
Q    And you don't think that he could come in handy some day in terms of taking on ISIS?  That component has not been reevaluated in some way?
MR. EARNEST:  It has not been reevaluated.  The administration believes that President Assad has lost legitimacy to lead.  We are not in a position of coordinating militarily with him as we strike ISIL targets.  In fact, we have gone to some lengths, as has been documented, to ensure that President Assad and his military do not interfere with our efforts to carry out these military airstrikes against ISIL targets in Syria.
Q    And on the letter that Denis McDonough sent to Senator Corker over the weekend, at one point in the letter the Chief of Staff says, “let us complete the negotiations.”  And he mentions the end of this month, but he also mentions June, which is the deadline for the more comprehensive agreement to be reached.  Is he saying that the Congress should wait until June -- until after June to weigh in with any kind of legislation?
MR. EARNEST:  Well, Jim, what he is saying very clearly is that Congress should not interfere in this process while negotiations are ongoing.  And what we have said is that we would expect by the end of March we would expect to be in a position to present a political agreement that has been reached between Iran and the P5+1 partners.  And if we cannot, that would be an indication in our minds that Iran is not being reasonable.  After all, we’ve been negotiating this for more than a year.  And we would be interested in getting together with Congress and with our allies to figure out what more pressure we could apply to Iran to have them participate in these negotiations in a constructive manner.
But what is also true is that if a political agreement can be reached by the end of March, two things would need to happen. The first is, there are -- as you would expect -- a lot of very specific technical details that need to be reached in terms of essentially codifying this political agreement into a set of very technical expectations about how Iran will come into compliance with the agreement, and we would expect that the experts will need some time to negotiate on those matters.  So we would anticipate that negotiation over those technical matters would continue after the end of March.
But the second thing is I would anticipate that if we’re able to reach an agreement at the end of March, the administration and our -- or the United States and our international partners would be in a position to start talking about that political agreement.  That’s the other interesting nature of the debate that we’ve been having here, is that there’s not an agreement yet, and for all the hyperventilating that we see on Capitol Hill, there is no agreement that has been reached, and that if we are able to reach an agreement before the end of this month, we will have an opportunity to talk about the details of that political agreement in a way that will allow not just members of Congress but the American public to evaluate the terms of that agreement.
Q    But you want any legislation that might be discussed to be held off until June? 
MR. EARNEST:  There would continue to be --
Q    Is that realistic to expect Congress to wait that long -- another three months?
MR. EARNEST:  Well, as I mentioned, Jim, Congress will have an opportunity to evaluate the political agreement that has been reached, if one is reached, before the end of March.  But, yes, we would expect that Congress would not interfere with ongoing negotiations if we reached the state of engaging in the kinds of technical negotiations that are required to implement the political agreement.
J.C.
Q    Two British leaders within two months’ time -- on Thursday, His Royal Highness Prince Charles will be here in the Oval Office with the Duchess of Cornwall.  Will the President be following up any of the discussions he had with Prime Minister Cameron two months ago in terms of defeating ISIL, in terms of the P5+1, et cetera, or will this be more of a social visit?
MR. EARNEST:  Well, I have not yet seen the agenda for the meeting that they’re planning, but I would anticipate that we can get you some more details around their meeting tomorrow.
Julie.
Q    A quick one on the trafficking bill, just to follow up on what Justin was asking.  What is the President’s position on this abortion language?  I mean, I didn’t hear a veto threat from you, so if the Republican leadership were to be able to advance this bill, would the President sign it in its current form?
MR. EARNEST:  Well, Julie, what we have said is that we’re going to see if the Senate can pass the child sex trafficking bill.  And, again, it seems like a pretty common-sense measure.  I think Democrats and Republicans can strongly agree that the federal government should be concentrating our efforts to counter child sex trafficking.  And the fact that this has become a political partisan controversy in the Senate is a shame, but is entirely consistent with the kind of leadership style that we’ve seen from Senate Republicans in the first eight or so weeks that they’ve been in the majority.
So we’ll see what’s going to pass the Senate.  Right now, they don’t have the votes to pass it through the Senate.
Q    Right, but you haven’t been shy about issuing veto threats to legislation that have provisions the President just won’t accept, and this is something that, as you mentioned, a lot of Democrats have felt is inappropriate.  So why wouldn’t he weigh in one way or the other?
MR. EARNEST:  Well, what the President believes is that we should be able to agree -- Democrats and Republicans -- on a piece of legislation that would allow the federal government to concentrate our resources and actually do a good job of fighting child sex trafficking.  There’s already a lot of work that the President has implemented unilaterally, using his executive authority, to use technology and other law enforcement resources to concentrate this effort.  But we certainly welcome legislation that would supplement this ongoing effort.
And, again, this is something that Democrats and Republicans should be able to agree on.  So if what is necessary is for Republicans to take out the controversial provision just so that we can do the good, common-sense work of passing legislation that would fight child sex trafficking, the President would, of course, sign that into law.
Q    But you’re not saying that he wouldn’t sign it otherwise?
MR. EARNEST:  Well, what I’m saying is that this is something that Democrats and Republicans should be able to come together around in the Senate.  And if the Republican leadership in the majority is willing to demonstrate the leadership that it takes to get this bill passed, then the President would sign it into law, assuming that, again, what Senator McConnell is going to have to do is remove the controversial provision.
Q    Just back on Iran for a second.  Can you just clarify -- you talked about -- Jim was asking about June and the actual negotiating deadline, but you were talking about a much longer period of time that I think you’re saying the White House feels should pass before Congress should take a vote on any agreement after you’ve been able to ascertain whether Iran is abiding by the terms, and sanctions should be lifted altogether.  I mean, that seems to envision a vote much longer down the line.  Is it the White House’s position that Congress should wait until later this year, maybe even next year, to vote on an agreement that’s being negotiated right now?
MR. EARNEST:  Well, it is the White House’s view that what Congress should do is they should -- if a political agreement is reached before the end of the month, they will have the opportunity to review it.  But there should be no interference from Congress while negotiations are ongoing.  And we have been pretty candid about the fact for a number of months now that if a political agreement is reached in March, it will require additional technical negotiations to ensure that that political agreement can be properly implemented.
Now, when it comes to Congress weighing in on this agreement, what we envision is a scenario where the statutory sanctions, the congressionally passed sanctions against Iran remain in place for some time -- that that is the way that we’re going to continue to pressure Iran alongside sanctions, to ensure that they’re complying with the terms of the international agreement.  And that means that it is not necessary for Congress to weigh in on this until Iran has demonstrated not over the course of weeks or months, but over the long term, a willingness to comply with the terms of the agreement.
Q    So then how do you square that with you and the President both saying that Congress has a rightful role to play here?  I mean, this agreement would have long since been solidified and finalized before Congress would ever have what you’re talking about as their input, their rightful input that the White House believes they should have.
MR. EARNEST:  Well, I will say that, just going back to the Chief of Staff’s letter from over the weekend, that the White House, the Departments of State, Treasury, Energy, Defense and the intelligence community have conducted more than 200 meetings, hearings, classified briefings and calls with members of the House and Senate.  More than half of those, more than 100 of those meetings and hearings and calls have taken place just in the last two or three months.  So this is an indication that there has been extensive congressional input in this process, as there should be.
Again, we do hear a lot of rhetoric from Capitol Hill that the administration is somehow trying to prevent Congress from being involved in this process and, as I mentioned earlier, that’s baloney.  The fact is there is a role for Congress to play; there has been from the beginning.  And there will be an opportunity for Congress to vote after Iran has demonstrated compliance with the terms of the agreement if one is reached.  And the reason for that is simply rooted in the fact that this a really powerful tool that Congress has passed, and they have given the President the authority already to waive those sanctions when he believes it’s in the best interest of the country.  But the President can’t remove those sanctions -- that’s something that only Congress can do.  And the fact is the President doesn’t believe that Congress should do that until Iran has demonstrated compliance with the agreement over the long term.
Dave.
Q    Thanks, Josh.  A couple months ago you were talking about the possibility of the President and Senator McConnell having a bourbon summit, and today you’re talking about Senator McConnell like he is barely qualified to manage a popsicle stand.  Is your extra-heavy criticism today --
MR. EARNEST:  Let the record reflect that that’s Dave’s observation about Senator McConnell’s leadership, not mine. 
Q    Is that baloney?  (Laughter.)
Q    Does your extra-heavy criticism today have anything to do with the fact that McConnell signed that letter to Iran last week?
MR. EARNEST:  No, it has everything to do with the fact that Senator McConnell himself suggested that the President not nominate or begin the process for considering Ms. Lynch’s nomination to be attorney general of the United States until after January.  But Senator McConnell himself is now using that as an excuse for not acting more promptly on Ms. Lynch’s nomination.  And I do think that that calls into question several aspects of his leadership.
Q    One other question.  Do you have a more comprehensive explanation than Eric gave us last week about why the President and the First Lady flew separate planes to Los Angeles on the same day to appear on separate talk shows?
MR. EARNEST:  Well, it’s my understanding that they flew into different airports.  It’s also my understanding that the First Lady actually left to get back to Washington, D.C. before the President even arrived in California.  So I think that’s a clear indication that their itineraries didn’t link up -- to say nothing of the fact that the President the next day, while the First Lady was in Washington, the President spent a day trip in Arizona before returning to Washington.
Q    For the purpose of the taxpayers’ expense, couldn’t they have arranged it better and saved some money?
MR. EARNEST:  Well, Dave, I’m not -- again, it does not appear to me that based on the fact that they didn’t fly to the same airport -- she left before he arrived, and she spent the day in Washington while he spent the day in Arizona -- that it was possible to make their schedules align and allow them to travel together.
I do feel confident in saying that if it had been possible for them to travel together, I’m sure that’s what they would have preferred to do.
George.
Q    Thanks, Josh.  One follow-up on Iran.  It seems like a stretch that the Republican Congress would vote to lift sanctions on Iran, even if the negotiation, the deal was put into place.  Are you concerned that down the road that could be a stumbling block for this agreement -- that it could be put into place, the sanctions and enforcement could sort of start happening but then the deal could fall apart if the sanctions on the U.S.’s behalf aren’t lifted?
MR. EARNEST:  Well, that’s a good question, Jordan.  I mean, obviously members of Congress will be in a position to determine for themselves whether or not the sanctions regime should be removed.  But the President doesn’t think that it would be a good idea for us to do that unless and until Iran has demonstrated over a longer period of time a commitment to actually living up to the terms of the agreement.
And so, no -- I guess the point is that if Congress were asked right away to remove the sanctions that are in place against Iran, I don’t think a majority of members of the Senate would vote -- or members of Congress would vote to do that.  But here’s the thing:  The President wouldn’t support doing that either.  The President believes that before we contemplate removing the statutory sanctions against Iran, we need Iran to demonstrate over the long term a commitment to living up to the terms of the agreement. 
So that is why it’s structured this way and I would anticipate that if, over the long term, Iran does demonstrate a willingness to shut down every path that they have to a nuclear weapon, does cooperate with intrusive sanctions that verify their compliance with the agreement, and their continued cooperation in this regard was dependent upon Congress removing the sanctions in the context of the agreement, I do think that would have an impact on the decision that’s made by members of the Senate, both Democrats and Republicans. 
But that’s an awful long way down the line, and there will be -- the point is, there will be ample opportunity for members of Congress to both evaluate the political agreement in the short term, to consider the technical agreement that is supposed to be reached by the end of June, and then not over the course of weeks and not over the course of months, but over the long term, evaluate Iran’s commitment to complying with the terms of the agreement.
Jessica, I’ll give you the last one.
Q    Thanks.  A couple of just little ones on Iran.  With respect to the U.N. portion of the sanctions, does the President support a lifting of United Nations sanctions against Iran -- beginning the process at this point?
MR. EARNEST:  Well, first of all, that is something that, again, as with so many of these technical questions, or detailed questions at least, that’s the subject of ongoing negotiations among our P5+1 partners and Iran. 
In addition to sanctions that Congress has put in place against Iran, the United Nations has put sanctions in place against Iran, and the United Nations will at some point have to consider removing those sanctions as well, assuming that will be part of the negotiated agreement with Iran, if one is reached.  So, at some point, there likely will have to be action taken at the United Nations, but that’s something that’s still being negotiated into the agreement, and it is the same reason, frankly, that Congress will have to take -- will have to weigh in and be heard on this matter.
Q    So you’re not willing to say whether the President supports the idea of the U.N. lifting them?  Inherently, keeping up the U.S.’s and P5+1’s end of the bargain, they would have to go.
MR. EARNEST:  Well, again, you’re talking about, well, if they do this, then they have to do that.  That’s exactly what’s being negotiated in Switzerland right now between Iran and the United States and our P5+1 partners.
Q    What about this idea that’s been circulating that lifting the U.N. sanctions could in some way circumvent Congress’s ability for the necessity to lift sanctions.  What’s the White House view on that?
MR. EARNEST:  The White House view on that is it is very clear that there is only one way to remove sanctions put in place by Congress, and that is for Congress to vote to remove them. 
Q    And lastly, just from a technical perspective, is there any estimate or working estimate on how long?  And there’s so many layers, and so even once you start the process, it could take -- I mean, I’m wondering if there’s any estimate on how long it could take, because there’s multiple layers just on the U.S. alone -- the U.N., executive orders, congressional sanctions, agency -- Treasury sanctions -- on how long it would take to unravel all the sanctions that the U.S. --
MR. EARNEST:  Well, again the pace of -- obviously, the kinds of commitments that Iran is willing to make when it comes to shutting down every path they have to a nuclear weapon and submitting to historically intrusive inspections will be an exchange for sanctions relief.  And so this is the essence of the negotiation, is what steps will Iran take and for how long will they maintain those steps, in exchange for the pace of sanctions relief.
And the President’s view is that the congressional sanctions that have been put in place are one of the more powerful tools that we have in this whole rack-up.  And the fact is, the President doesn’t believe that we should take that really powerful tool off the table on the front end.  He believes that we should do that nearer to the end, after Iran has demonstrated over the course of a sustained period of time a willingness to live up to the terms of the agreement.
Q    So when you talk about Congress’s permission within the sanctions language for the President to temporarily waive them, there’s that ability, but then there’s also these executive-level implemented sanctions.  So when you’re talking about the concept of the President waiving anything, are we talking about both sort of pots of sanctions relief that are being contemplated, or are we just talking about the temporary waiving of the congressional ones?
MR. EARNEST:  Well, you’re right, those are two different things.  And again, this will be part of the negotiations.  Again, Iran is going to commit to taking some steps.  Iran is going to commit to intrusive inspections, and they’ll do so in exchange for some sanctions relief.  And we’re not going to give them all the sanctions relief at the beginning.  We’re going to wait over a period of time so that Iran can demonstrate their sustained compliance with this agreement.  And as Iran, over the course of time, commits to these -- or fulfills these commitments, then the international community will respond by following through on the commitments that we have made to offer sanctions relief. 
But the onus in this situation is going to be on the Iranians to demonstrate their willingness to comply with the terms of the agreement.  And in exchange, the international community will start to take steps in a phased pattern of offering sanctions relief.  But again, that’s not something that we envision happening in the short term; that’s going to happen over the long term as Iran demonstrates sustained compliance with the agreement, if an agreement is reached.
Q    If I can just press you -- I think that point is amply made, but what I haven't heard from you is these executive-level, can he waive -- I mean, they’re executive-level sanctions, so he could take those off the table.
MR. EARNEST:  If they’re executive sanctions that the President has the authority to waive, then that will be part of the negotiated agreement.  And as you point out, the legislation that Congress passed, putting in place the sanctions, included in there presidential waiver authority.  It did give the President the authority, in the context of that legislation, to waive the sanctions if the President believed that it was in the best interest of our national security.
And in the context of an agreement, that’s what the President would contemplate doing.  But he would not envision a scenario where we would remove those sanctions until Congress has had the opportunity to vote on it.  And the President doesn’t believe that we should remove those sanctions, and he doesn’t believe that Congress should vote on it until Iran has demonstrated sustained compliance with the agreement, if an agreement is reached.
Mara, did you have something else before I go?
Q    I just wanted to clear up one thing.  You keep on referring to it as a political agreement, and last week Kerry said this is not a legally binding agreement.  Is there anything that the President can negotiate on his own that is legally binding, other than a treaty, which has to be approved by Congress -- the Senate?
MR. EARNEST:  Well, I think the thing that’s important is for us to recognize that the stakes for Iran and their compliance with the agreement, if one is reached, are sky-high.  The sanctions regime that’s been put in place has had a decimating impact on their economy.  And we’ve already seen the evidence that indicates that Iran’s leadership is under pretty serious political pressure inside their country to get sanctions relief.  That is the leverage that the international community has to get Iran to comply with the terms of any agreement that they sign.
The point here is that in the eyes of Iran, when it comes to the commitments that they make, I assure you the Iranians feel like the commitments that they’re making are very binding, because their failure to live up to the terms of the agreement would result in this sanctions regime that has decimated their economy from snapping immediately back into place.
Q    But what about from our point of view?  Because he said it wasn’t legally binding in answer to the letter suggesting that another President could overrule it if they wanted to.  If there anything the President can do on his own, short of an actual treaty, that is legally binding?
MR. EARNEST:  Well, again, that’s a pretty technical legal question.  But I think the point that I made to Bill is relevant in answer to your question, which is that if we do see a scenario where Iran does reach an agreement with the international community, they satisfy the international community’s concerns as it relates to their pathways to a bomb that they satisfy the international community’s concerns in terms of allowing inspectors regular access to their nuclear facilities. 
We will essentially resolve the international community’s concerns with their nuclear problem, and will, for the foreseeable future, as those inspections remain in place.  I would be very surprised that an incoming U.S. President would want to unravel all of that -- I guess I would be very surprised if an incoming U.S. President wanted to unravel all of that. 
Q    Even though they could legally?
MR. EARNEST:  Well, again, that’s a question for a lawyer.  They can explain to you what sort of legal authority they have.  But I think as a purely practical matter, if the international community has reached this agreement with Iran, and we can verify Iran’s compliance with the agreement, and the international community is onboard with the enforcement of that agreement, then I would be very surprised that an incoming U.S. President would unravel all of that.  All right?
Q    Can I follow up on that?
MR. EARNEST:  Go ahead, Mark.  Last one.
Q    Then why not pursue a treaty?
MR. EARNEST:  Well, in terms of the legal difference between all of these things, I’m far outside my field of expertise on that front.  I think the point is that the United States can obtain the commitments that we need from Iran, in partnership with the international community, without a treaty.  And for the reasons that I explained to Mara, they’re making very serious commitments, and I assure you that Iran’s leadership understands the stakes if they don’t live up to the terms of the agreement.  They have already come to the negotiating table to try to get the international community to relieve the sanctions regime that’s in place. 
So I know that there’s been some talk about sort of this notion of what’s legally binding, but I assure you that Iran’s political leadership understands the consequences of breaking this agreement.
Q    Josh, you’ve said in your answer to me earlier here today, you essentially sketched out a scenario whereby if an agreement is reached it satisfies everyone’s concerns about these different pathways to a bomb, and yet these outstanding questions about the possible military dimension of their program are left for some future resolution, and we’ve already been at that for almost a decade.
When you say to us, gee, we’ve been negotiating for a year, we should have a good idea of whether it's going to come to fruition, shouldn’t we have a good idea, A, that it’s going to come to fruition on the IAEA PMD track?  And also, you cannot satisfy everybody’s concerns about the pathways if that IAEA PMD track is left out there unresolved.
MR. EARNEST:  Well, I do think that under the kind of agreement -- well, let me say one thing.  The first is, we can certainly evaluate that argument if we’re able to reach an agreement.  And we can look at the terms and determine whether or not we’ve succeeded in resolving the international community’s concerns -- if we’ve shut down the pathway at Natanz; if we’ve shut down the effort at Iraq, the heavy water reactor there that’s using plutonium; if we have succeeded in shutting down the pathway to a bomb at Fordow; and if we’ve put in place these intrusive inspections that would allow us to -- that would ease our concerns about a covert path to a nuclear weapon.
The point is we’ll have an opportunity in the context of the agreement to evaluate whether or not people’s concerns have been met when it comes to their nuclear program.  But we’re going to have a long list of concerns about other things that Iran does that relates to their ballistic missile program, that relates to their continued menacing of Israel.  I failed to mention earlier, their continued support for terrorism around the globe.
Q    In other words, you’re saying we can meet all these concerns, but we can carve out the PMD.  The PMD is not about Israel or ballistic missiles, or about terror or support for Hezbollah or Hamas.  The PMD is on the nuclear program.
MR. EARNEST:  Right.  Well, we’ll have an opportunity once the agreement is reached to see what impact that agreement would have on the PMD track.  But again, we haven’t reached an agreement yet, so that’s where we would go. 
All right.  Thanks, everybody.
END

	2:10 P.M. EDT
The White House
Office of the Press Secretary
James S. Brady Press Briefing Room
12:46 P.M. EST
MR. EARNEST:  Good afternoon, everybody.  Happy Monday.  I hope you had a restful weekend.  March certainly strolled in like a lion; hopefully the lamb is going to appear here sometime soon, I hope.
Jim, do you want to get us started with questions today?
Q    Sure.  Thanks, Josh.  I wondered if the President had a chance to watch Prime Minister Netanyahu’s speech to AIPAC and if you all have a reaction.
MR. EARNEST:  I don’t believe that he did.  But what I can say is that the reaction here is I think as was appropriately characterized in the remarks that were delivered by Ambassador Power prior to the Prime Minister’s remarks and will be followed up by the remarks from the National Security Advisor this evening, which is that the relationship between the United States and Israel is one that has been strong for generations for a variety of reasons.  It has been strengthened under the leadership of this President, and it is a relationship that is enduring not just because of our shared national security interests, but also because of the deep cultural ties that we have between our people. 
We share values.  We share a system of government.  And that is indicative of all that we have in common.  And certainly the President has pursued policies that have been interested in strengthening that relationship even further.  And I think whether you talk about the United States’ strong military support for Israel or the way the United States has routinely and consistently stood up for Israel in a variety of diplomatic fora even when no one else would, the relationship between the United States and Israel is an important one and one that has been strengthened under this President’s leadership.
Q    Josh, over the past several weeks, the Prime Minister’s address to Congress has been described by the administration as political, as destructive to the Israeli-U.S. relationship, as a breach in protocol.  Yesterday, Secretary Kerry said that Prime Minister Netanyahu was welcome to speak in the United States.  Why the change in tone?  Why not adopt that tone from the beginning and perhaps avoid a whole tense episode in U.S.-Israeli relations?
MR. EARNEST:  Well, Jim, I think the point of what Secretary Kerry was discussing is something that you’ve heard me say from here many times, which is that as the Prime Minister of Israel, he gets to set his own schedule and he gets to take the actions that he believes are consistent with his own objectives, whatever they may be.  And that has been true from the beginning and this has been true even in other situations when we’ve had differences of opinion with the Israeli leadership even on entirely different topics. 
For example, this past summer, we repeatedly reaffirmed the right of the Israelis to take steps related to their security that they believed were in their best interests in terms of confronting extremists in Gaza.  There were times where the United States expressed concerns about that strategy and, in some cases, in the way that it was implemented.  But at each turn, we reaffirmed the right of the Israeli political leadership to make decisions about what they believe is necessary to defend their country.  This is consistent with our view that it’s the Prime Minister of Israel who’s able to determine his own schedule and take the steps that he believes are necessary to communicate or to represent his country.
We, however, have indicated that it’s important that any steps that anybody takes should not be construed as subjecting the relationship between the United States and Israel to partisan politics, that if we reduce the relationship between our two countries to just a relationship between two political parties, that's going to have a negative impact on the relationship between our two countries.  And ultimately that has been something that we have -- as you point out -- expressed some concerns about in the past.
Q    Does the President agree with the Prime Minister’s assessment that the U.S. worries about its security whereas Israel worries about its own survival, and therefore, the view of Iran might be different in both places?
MR. EARNEST:  Well, I certainly would allow that the differences -- that there are differences of perspective when it comes to a variety of national security issues.  And there’s no doubt about that.  What the President has put foremost in his mind when confronting a wide range of threats across the globe is the U.S. national security interests.  That's at the top of the list.
Now, because of our strong ties to Israel, because they are our closest ally in a very volatile region, because of the deep values that we share, it’s not at all uncommon for those interests to overlap.  In many cases, and I would say even in the vast majority of cases, our priorities are consistent with the priorities that are articulated by Israel’s political leadership.

	The best example I can give you is actually when it comes to Iran and their nuclear program.  The President has made clear that it’s the policy of the United States that Iran will never acquire a nuclear weapon.  This is a value and a goal that is shared by the Israeli Prime Minister. 
Q    On another subject, Secretary Kerry met with Foreign Minister Lavrov today.  What was the purpose of that?  It didn't seem to go very well, so I’m curious, in the aftermath of reports of breaches in the Minsk accord and the murder in Moscow last week, what was the purpose of that meeting?
MR. EARNEST:  Well, I have not gotten a specific readout of that meeting, so I’d refer you to the State Department for that. But I can tell you that we have -- that this administration has a number of diplomatic engagements over the course of this week to continue to explore the situation in Ukraine and to express our concerns about the continued efforts of Russia and the separatists that they back to flout the agreement that they signed just a couple of weeks ago in Minsk.
We continue to see that, while there are some preliminary reports of some heavy weapons being withdrawn, that there continue to be efforts by the separatists and the Russians to prevent the OSCE monitors from evaluating exactly where those weapons are being withdrawn to. 
And it’s important to remind everybody, including those who signed the agreement, apparently, that Russia and the separatists are supposed to allow the OSCE monitors full and unfettered access to areas of conflict.  And that is not something that the Russian-backed separatists have followed through on, and that’s a source of concern not just here in the United States but by the other parties that have signed on to that agreement.
A couple of other points.  Obviously, over the weekend you saw that the Vice President had a telephone conversation with the Ukrainian President.  You mentioned already that Secretary Kerry met with his Russian counterpart in Geneva today.  And I believe this was announced at the end of last week, but a week from today, the President will be hosting here at the White House European Council President Donald Tusk, and that will also be an opportunity for us to discuss some of these issues with him as well.
Julia.
Q    Was the President disappointed on Friday night to have to sign a bill funding for the Department of Homeland Security for just another week?  And what is he doing in this week to ensure that Congress will pass a long-term funding bill?  Is he reaching out at all?
MR. EARNEST:  The President certainly was disappointed to have to sign that one-week extension.  That’s bad policy, and it reflected a bad choice by the Republican leadership in the House of Representatives.  The fact is, the House should have acted -- as the Senate did -- in bipartisan fashion to pass a full year funding bill for the Department of Homeland Security that did not include any politically motivated riders. 
So the fact that the President had to sign a seven-day extension doesn’t just reflect a bad decision made by the Republican leadership in the House, it reflects the failed leadership of the Republican leadership in the House.  And we are hopeful that Republican leaders will do what they should have done last week, which is allow the House of Representatives to vote on a clean, full year funding bill for the Department of Homeland Security.  And the reason for them to do so is that it is clearly in the best interest of the American people for the Department of Homeland Security to get funding and certainty around their funding levels. 
It also is a good thing to do because we know it will pass with bipartisan support.  All of the hard work on this has been done at the end of last year; that Democrats and Republicans sat down together and negotiated the appropriate spending levels in that bill to make sure that all of the important programs at the Department of Homeland Security were funded at the appropriate level.  So whether it’s cybersecurity, or border security, or port security, funding for the TSA, funding for the Secret Service, all of those funding levels represent policy choices that required bipartisan compromise and cooperation.  And that hard work was done.  That agreement was hammered out and it passed through the Senate with bipartisan support.  We’re hopeful it will do the same in the House this week.
Q    Sure, but on outreach, I mean, I know on Friday we saw that the President reached out to Democratic leadership.  Is he changing his strategy at all this week?  Is he speaking to Speaker Boehner?  Is there anything he is doing to reach out to the other side of the aisle on this?
MR. EARNEST:  Well, I don’t have any specific phone calls to read out to you, but I can tell you that so much of this dispute has been a dispute between the Republican leadership in the Senate and a Republican leader in the House.  And the irony is, is that the leaders -- those two Republican leaders signed an op-ed the day after the election, touting the new Republican majority in the Congress, it was headlined, “Now we can get Congress going.”  And, unfortunately, over the last couple of months, we’ve seen exactly the opposite.  And hopefully, though, that cooler heads will prevail and a smarter decision for the country will be made and the House of Representatives will be allowed to vote on and pass a full year funding bill for the Department of Homeland Security.
Q    On the police task force, recommendations were announced today.  Advocates are applauding this, but say that they want to see how it plays out.  How can the federal government tell local law enforcement how they should implement these changes, especially if they don’t put money behind it in the form of grants?  Does the President have any plans to back up these recommendations with funding?
MR. EARNEST:  Well, that’s a good question, Julia.  I can tell you that over the course of the last couples of months this policing task force that represents a variety of perspectives on law enforcement has held public hearings across the country.   They’ve taken testimony from more than 100 witnesses just in the space of two months.  I think that reflects a seriousness of purpose with which these dedicated professionals have taken on this task. 
We’re certainly appreciative of their work.  They’re going to remain on the job for another 30 days as the President and other members of his administration evaluate their report, and that will give them ample time to conduct any follow-up if needed.
There are several things that the President, however, is doing right away.  The first is he is directing all federal law enforcement agencies to carefully review the task force report so that if there are any recommendations that are applicable to federal law enforcement officers, that they can be implemented right away.  The second thing that he is going to do is ask the Department of Justice to examine what sort of public-private partnerships could be formed to advance the goals that are outlined in the report.
And then, finally, as it goes to your specific question, the President has asked the Community Oriented Policing Services office at the Department of Justice to take responsibility for advancing the work of the task force, including prioritizing grant funding to law enforcement agencies that meet appropriate benchmarks that are related to these recommendations. 
So to the extent that there is already funding in the pipeline to implement some of these proposals, the President wants to get that funding expedited, and at a minimum prioritized.  And ultimately what we have here are a collection of best practices and recommendations from experts, and they will be passed on to law enforcement organizations across the country. What we know about these law enforcement organizations is that, by and large, they are just as committed as the administration is to trying to strike the right balance to -- well, in terms of trying to build trust with the communities that they serve and protect.  The reason for that is it will allow them to be more effective as they do their job, but also allow their officers to do that job more safely. 
And so this will continue to be a priority of the administration.  The Department of Justice will principally have the role of taking it from here and making sure that it gets implemented not just among federal law enforcement officers, but also in communities across the country. 
Okay.  Michelle.
Q    On the DHS issue, last week you said that if the President felt like he needed to call Speaker Boehner or sit down with somebody on the Republican side, that he would do that.  So as this got down to the wire, did he feel that it was not necessary?  And if not, why? 
MR. EARNEST:  Well, I think principally because it was clear to everyone who was looking, Democrats and Republicans, that allowing the Department of Homeland Security to lapse their funding would be bad for the national security of the United States.  It certainly would not be a good outcome for the American people.  And the other thing that was also clear is that there was strong bipartisan support in the Senate for passing a full-year budget for the Department of Homeland Security. 
I notice that the House Republican leader Kevin McCarthy was on a program over the weekend talking about this proposal, and he talked about how 57 percent of the United States Senate was supportive of the Collins amendment.  These are the provisions that would undermine the President’s ability to implement his executive actions to reform our broken immigration system.  Well, by that measure, there are actually 68 percent of the United States Senate that supports a clean, full-year funding bill for the Department of Homeland Security -- that essentially supports taking politics out of the equation for once and funding the Department of Homeland Security for the remainder of the year.
Coincidentally, there were also 68 Democrats and Republicans in the last Senate who supported common-sense, compromise immigration reform legislation -- something that was also blocked by House Republicans. 
So if we're going to evaluate things on that metric, we certainly would welcome the opportunity to do that.  And that would result in the House even considering and allowing a vote on legislation to fund the Department of Homeland Security and to reform our broken immigration system.
Q    So when it looked clear that the House was not going to do that, what the Senate did, did the President feel like his input -- if it was going to be directly to Speaker Boehner -- wouldn’t really make any difference?
MR. EARNEST:  Well, I think the President felt like it was clear what the choice was for the Republican leadership.  And ultimately that is because there have been previous discussions between the President and Republican -- and congressional leaders about the importance of funding the Department of Homeland Security.  The Secretary of Homeland Security, Jeh Johnson, had spent an enormous amount of time over the last several weeks working with Democrats and Republicans to make sure they understood that funding the Department of Homeland Security for this year needed to be a priority. 
And so, again, ultimately what the House should do is exactly what the Senate did, which is to allow a vote on a clean, full year funding bill for the Department of Homeland Security.  There’s strong bipartisan support for this legislation, and we hope it will pass.  They should have done it last week.  And the fact that the President had to sign a seven-day extension does reflect an abject failure of the leadership in the House.  But they have an opportunity to address that shortcoming by allowing this full year funding bill to go to the floor this week.
Q    So given what it looked like going in to the House starting to vote on what was then a three-week measure, was this outcome worse or better than what the President expected to happen?
MR. EARNEST:  Well, the President’s expectation and I think the American people’s expectation is that members of Congress need to do their job.  And the most important job that they have, arguably, or at least the most important power that they have is the power of the purse and to ensure that government priorities are funded.  And certainly the President takes very seriously his responsibility to protect the American people.  I would expect and the President would expect that congressional Republicans would take seriously their responsibility to ensure that those efforts are properly funded, or at least funded at all. 
So, again, it is the basic responsibility that House Republican leaders have this week.  We saw the bipartisan support and the bipartisan vote for this legislation in the Senate.  We’ll see that bipartisan vote in the House as long as House Republican leaders will allow it to come up for a vote.  Hopefully they’ll do that before Friday.
Q    And lastly, on Netanyahu.  Today he laid out his purpose for coming to speak before Congress, which was to prevent Iran from ever getting a nuclear weapon.  We heard Samantha Power at virtually the same time say that that will never happen.  So is his speech then unnecessary?
MR. EARNEST:  The Prime Minister’s, you mean? 
Q    Yes.  Is his coming here unnecessary if that's what he lays out his goal to be?
MR. EARNEST:  Well, ultimately -- as I mentioned in response to Jim’s question, ultimately it’s the responsibility of the Israeli Prime Minister to determine his own schedule.  And he can make his decisions about how it advances his agenda to speak wherever he wants.  But the fact is the United States of America, under the leadership of the U.S. President, Barack Obama, has implemented a policy to ensure that Iran does not obtain a nuclear weapon, because it is clearly in the national security interests of the United States for Iran not to obtain a nuclear weapon.  And that is why we are pursuing an agreement that would verify that outcome.
Q    Well, so then doesn't the administration see his coming here and giving this speech as unnecessary then?
MR. EARNEST:  Well, again, it is the responsibility of the Prime Minister to make his own decisions about where he wants to go.  But what should not be lost on anybody is the strategy that this President has put in place to deal with Iran’s nuclear program is consistent with achieving our goal of ensuring that Iran does not obtain a nuclear weapon.
If you’ll indulge me for just a minute, let me explain why we believe that's the case in the context of these diplomatic negotiations.
Ultimately, these diplomatic negotiations or this diplomacy, these negotiations, will be resolved once we have succeeded in essentially shutting down four pathways to Iran acquiring the fissile material that's necessary to build a nuclear weapon.  The first is to deal with the enrichment capacity at the Natanz facility.  The second is to deal with the enrichment capacity at the Fordow facility.  The third is to deal with the plutonium enrichment capacity at the heavy-water reactor that's currently under construction at Arak.  And fourth, to ensure that Iran does not have the capacity to pursue a covert option at a facility that is not yet known to the international community.
And at each stage, we're going to ensure that we are going to set back Iran’s progress on a nuclear weapon.  And that means essentially extending -- if we're successful in this effort -- and a diplomatic agreement will not be signed unless we are -- but if we're successful, we will essentially have extended the breakout period to one year.  And we have already heard from experts who have said that the current breakout period is only two or three months.  So we would substantially, with the successful completion of this agreement, roll back Iran’s nuclear program in a way that would prevent them from obtaining a nuclear weapon, and then putting in place international monitors for an extended period of time to ensure that they're complying with this agreement.
And the point that the President has repeatedly made is that if they indicate that they are not willing to comply with an agreement -- once one is signed -- then we continue to have all of these options on the table.  We can add additional sanctions to the mix if we feel like that would be successful.  We’ll even have a military option that continues to be available to the President. 
So the pursuit if this agreement is one that does not foreclose additional steps in the future if necessary if Iran fails to live up to the agreement.  And, unfortunately, what we have seen from critics of this agreement is a refusal to offer up any sort of alternative other than the military option.  And that, I think, is an important part of the President’s consideration as he formulates this strategy and this policy.
Nadia.
Q    Let me try one more question on Iran.  Does the administration believe that Prime Minister Netanyahu’s speech to Congress tomorrow will complicate the negotiation at this stage or affect in any way or shape the chances of getting an agreement?
MR. EARNEST:  Well, it shouldn’t.  And it’s because the international community is united as we continue to pursue a diplomatic resolution to the international community’s concerns with Iran’s nuclear program.  As we’ve talked about quite a bit before, the reason that we have been able to compel Iran to the negotiating table is because the United States put in place a very stringent sanctions regime against Iran.  And that has required the compliance and cooperation with the broader international community.  There are a lot of other countries that rely much more heavily on importing Iranian oil than the United States does, and what that means is it means that there are other countries that are making substantial economic sacrifices to not purchase oil from Iran.
But it’s because of that economic pressure and isolation that Iran has come to the negotiating table.  And what we are hopeful that we can achieve in the context of these negotiations is to shutdown these four clear paths to the fissile material that’s necessary to build a nuclear weapon.  And if so -- and then put in place a monitoring regimen that would allow us to verify their compliance with the agreement, we would succeed in essentially ensuring that Iran does not obtain a nuclear weapon.
Q    I don’t want to keep beating a dead horse, but, I mean, the Prime Minister described the trip as historical and he said that he’s coming to protect Israel’s security.  So obviously he does not see an eye-to-eye to what you say --
MR. EARNEST:  Well, as you heard me say at the beginning of this briefing and as you heard Ambassador Power say in her remarks to AIPAC, the United States has made clear that our foreign policy goal is to ensure that Iran does obtain or acquire a nuclear weapon.  That is our goal.  It is my understanding that that’s a goal that is shared by the Israeli political leadership as well. 
So, again, I would allow the Israeli Prime Minister the prerogative of describing his trip however he would like.  But what is clear is that the President is making decisions about our foreign policy with the foreign policy interests of the United States at the forefront.  The good news for Prime Minister Netanyahu is that in almost every situation, what’s good for the United States also happens to be good for Israel.
Q    I want to get your reaction to this ad against Susan Rice, that she’s been accused of having a blind spot for genocide by a Jewish rabbi.  Just your reaction to that.
MR. EARNEST:  It’s a despicable attack and it’s one that I was gratified to see be repudiated by the Israeli Prime Minister’s office.
Jon.
Q    Actually, the Israeli Prime Minister has articulated a different goal than what you did at this briefing.  You said the United States is committed to a position where Iran will never acquire a nuclear weapon.  What Bibi Netanyahu said today, and what he’s been saying all along, is the goal is to make sure Iran doesn’t get the capability to build a nuclear weapon.  Which he says -- and is -- a different view.  So what do you say about his view that the whole point of this effort is to ensure not just that Iran doesn’t get a weapon, but that Iran doesn’t get the ability to build a weapon?
MR. EARNEST:  Well, I assume that the Prime Minster will have an opportunity to elaborate on what he means when he says the ability to acquire a nuclear weapon. 
Q    I can tell you what he means. 
MR. EARNEST:  Okay.
Q    He’s referring to an enrichment capability.  He’s also talked about the fact that they have a ballistic missile program that would enable a delivery system for a nuclear weapon.  That’s what he’s talking about.  When Iran has the ability to produce highly enriched uranium -- that is the fuel to make a nuclear bomb -- he believes that’s a threat to his real survival because it puts them on a path to building a bomb.
MR. EARNEST:  And has he laid out a strategy for how to prevent them from -- how to accomplish the goal that he has laid out?  I guess the point is -- you don’t have to speak for him any longer.  The point is he has not laid out that strategy.  The President has laid out a clear strategy that we’re working to achieve that would prevent Iran from acquiring a nuclear weapon.

	And that is a clearly stated foreign policy goal, and it is a priority that this President has made because it's in the clear national security interest of the United States.  It also happens to be in the national security interest of our closest ally in the region, Israel.
Q    So is he correct, though, to say that your goal then is not to prevent Iran from getting the capability to build a bomb, it's to prevent them from getting a bomb?  You acknowledge there’s a difference there?
MR. EARNEST:  Well, if he says that there’s a difference there he’s allowed to do that.  The point that I'm making --
Q    So you don’t think there’s a difference between those two positions?
MR. EARNEST:  Well, I guess you could make the case that there is one.  I'm happy for someone else to do that if they would like to.  The point is that we believe the President has made a strategic decision about what he believes is clearly in the best interest of the United States, and it happens to be in the best interest of Israel.
No one else has laid out a strategy for how to accomplish what apparently the Prime Minster has laid out as his goal.  He hasn’t even laid out a strategy for how to accomplish his goal.  And, by the way, I'm not even sure that the military option that some people considered to be an alternative to the President’s strategy, would even accomplish his goal, because it would require not just a detailed destruction of Iran’s infrastructure, but it also would require the removal of knowledge that Iran has already obtained. 
So the fact is the goal that the President has set out that would ensure that -- or that is consistent with our national security imperatives here in this country is to ensure that Iran does not obtain a nuclear weapon.  And the best way for us to do this is at the negotiating table.  Those negotiations are underway, even as we speak. 
But the other thing that I have not mentioned so far in this briefing that’s important for everybody to realize is it continues to be the case that our likelihood of success when it comes to reaching a deal in the context of these negotiations is only, at best, 50/50.  There are difficult decisions that need to be made by the Iranian government in terms of their willingness to sign on to this agreement, and this President has made clear that he’s not going to sign a bad deal.
Q    So you’ve been saying the 50/50 thing.  The President has used that for a long time now.  We’re getting down to the wire.  The deadline is the end of this month.  What’s your sense? Has it gotten any more likely, any less likely?
MR. EARNEST:  No, I think it’s stayed about the same.  And the reason for that is, while there has been progress that’s been made in the context of the negotiations, there continued to be some significant gaps.  But ultimately, all of this comes down to the likelihood of Iran’s political leadership signing off on the deal.  And that is something that is very difficult to ascertain from afar.  And that is the biggest X factor that remains here, and it's one that makes us feel like, at best, our options of reaching an agreement are 50/50
Q    And finally, you know there’s a move in Congress to say that if a deal is reached, that it should go before the United States Senate for approval, or not.  And I understand the President would veto such a bill.  Can you explain why Congress should not have a say in this?  I mean, this is a major international agreement.  Why are you opposed to allowing Congress to have a say in this?
MR. EARNEST:  Well, Jon, we have made as much progress as we have so far in these negotiations because we’ve been able to work closely and successfully with Congress to pass and implement one of the toughest sanctions regime that’s ever been put in place against any country.  That has compelled Iran to the negotiating table. 
But, ultimately, we can’t put in place an additional hurdle for that agreement to overcome here at the 11th hour, that if the United States is going to sit at the table with our negotiating partners not just in Iran but with the rest of the international community, our P5-plus-1 partners, then we need to make sure that we can live up to our agreement. 
So there is an important role for Congress to play.  There has been on the front end in terms of getting us to this situation.  That’s why the administration has continued to carefully brief on a regular basis in detailed fashion, even in classified settings, the details and progress that are being made in these negotiations, because the administration considers, frankly, Democrats and Republicans in Congress to be partners in this effort.  And, ultimately, when it comes to offering up statutory sanctions relief, essentially providing significant relief from the congressionally passed sanctions -- that will require congressional action. 
But the fact of the matter is, Jon, what we’re envisioning as we work on this agreement is not offering significant sanctions relief at the beginning, that ultimately we’re talking about a phased agreement where Iran will start to take some steps and the international community will start to offer some relief. And that is consistent with verifying that Iran is serious about living up to their end of the deal.
Justin.  You look much closer than you usually are, so congratulations on your new seat.
Q    Thank you.  I wanted to ask about Orrin Hatch.  He, in an interview with The New York Times over the weekend, said that the President’s corporate tax reform proposal was, “pretty well dead” to him.  And he said that neither Republicans, nor corporations would go for it because they’d essentially be paying taxes that they’ve already paid internationally.  This has been something that obviously the President has outlined repeatedly as kind of a top priority for him, working with congressional Republicans -- to hear the top Senate Finance Committee Chairman come out pretty strongly against this plan, I’m wondering what your reaction is to it and where that leaves the President’s efforts on this.
MR. EARNEST:  Well, nobody in this building is surprised to hear that there is a senior Republican in the Congress indicating that he stands squarely with well-connected, wealthy corporations when it comes to the tax code.  That’s consistent with the kind of the strategy that we’ve seen Republicans try to advance for decades now.  Republicans are squarely on the side of corporations and the President is squarely on the side of middle-class families.
And there is a different of opinion when it comes to this.  But the President has put forward his own ideas about how he thinks that we can get this done.  It’s a pretty common-sense proposal where we can actually close some loopholes that only benefit those wealthy and well-connected corporations that apparently are close friends with Senator Hatch. 
And we can use that revenue to invest in the kinds of projects that benefit everybody -- certainly will continue to benefit those corporations when they are landing at a new airport, or moving their goods on a modern rail infrastructure, or moving those goods on a modern superhighway.  That’s clearly and consistent with the interests of the business community, but more importantly, it’s consistent with the interests of middle-class families in this country.  It’s going to create jobs in the short term.  It’s going to make sure that we have more economic growth over the longer term. And that’s what the President is focused on. 
And so it’s not surprising to me that somebody who is focused on looking out for big business in Washington might have a difference of opinion when it comes to the President’s tax policies.
Q    Well, implicit in sort of that antagonism toward Senator Hatch, is this a concession?  There’s a plan that you guys have --
MR. EARNEST:  He called our plan dead on arrival.  I thought I was pretty nice to him in contrast.
Q    Well, I mean, this is a plan that you’ve had for many years.  And so I’m wondering if it doesn’t seem to be getting a warm reception on the Hill, do you guys also see this as more of a signpost than anything that has a legitimate chance of passing in a Republican-controlled Congress?
MR. EARNEST:  Well, there has been an effort to put some more details and to add some tweaks to this to try to be more specific and to try to be clearer about what our policy goals are.  But, ultimately, those policy goals are about expanding economic growth and creating jobs for middle-class families.  And this tax approach is consistent with that. 
The truth is there are other Republicans who have had somewhat better things to say about this approach in general, where there are some Republicans who have indicated that this could be an area of compromise, even if they haven’t whole-heartedly embraced our specific proposal. 
And this is something that we’re going to continue to talk about.  It’s going to require some compromise on both sides, as we’ve talked about quite a bit over the last couple of months.  Ultimately, if we reach a tax reform agreement, it’s going to include some things that the President doesn’t like.  It also will include some things that presumably congressional Republicans, particularly those like Senator Hatch that are close to wealthy corporations, they probably won’t like either.  But the question is whether or not we can actually try to find some common ground in the middle that would allow us to advance the interests of the American people.
One example of this, again, is a well-thought-out but robust investment in infrastructure in this country.  That’s something that would benefit everybody and surely that’s something that both Democrats and Republicans could come together around.  So we’ll continue to see where this goes.
Q    Bernie Sanders, maybe on the other side of the aisle up on Capitol Hill, has suggested that the White House could raise as much as $100 billion through using executive action to close corporate loopholes.  If your plan is kind of running into resistance with Republicans on Capitol Hill, is that an idea that you guys would embrace towards sort of all those holes that you just outlined?
MR. EARNEST:  Well, for any sort of possible executive actions along those lines, I’d refer you to the Treasury Department.  But the President certainly has not indicated any reticence about using his executive authority to try to advance an agenda that benefits middle-class Americans.  Now, I don’t want to leave you with the impression that there is some imminent announcement -- there’s not, at least that I know of.
Q    Is it something under consideration?  Have you guys been looking at the tax codes --
MR. EARNEST:  Well, the President has asked his team to examine the array of executive authorities that are available to him to try to make progress on his goal.  So I’m not in a position to talk about any of those in any detail at this point, but the President is very interested in this avenue generally.
Tommy.
Q    Thanks, Josh.  I have three quick questions.  First of all, I wanted to ask you about some comments that Senator John McCain made this morning on “Morning Joe.”  He said -- he was talking about ISIS, and he said he’d spoken to a leader of a Middle Eastern country last week who told him, I’m going back and telling the other Arab countries we have to develop our own plans, we cannot depend on the United States.  Is that a strategic goal of the United States, is to get Middle Eastern countries to depend on us to fight ISIS?
MR. EARNEST:  Well, Tommy, the President has made clear that a core component of our strategy to defeat and to degrade and ultimately destroy ISIL is to build a broad international coalition of more than 60 countries.  Many of them are countries from the region, and we value their support, we value their contribution to this broader effort.  And by working together, we’re confident that we can ultimately accomplish that goal.
Q    Is that kind of what you want them to do, is to strike out on their own a little bit more in this fight?
MR. EARNEST:  Well, the President does believe that part of our strategy, at least when it comes to Iraq, is building up the capacity of Iraq’s security forces and Kurdish security forces to take this fight on their own and to take responsibility for the security situation in their own country.  Now, the President has been clear that the United States and our coalition partners will be there to assist with the training and equipping of those security forces, to even offer them advice where necessary.  The President also is prepared and has on many occasions to great effect used coalition military airpower to back up their efforts on the ground.  They have succeeded at some key points of rolling back ISIL’s advances. 
I can just give you a couple of examples that I had asked for here, that local forces in Iraq have undertaken significant offensive operations in Iraq against ISIL.  They’ve done so with the support of the coalition.  That's included efforts around the Mosul Dam and Rabia, and Mount Sinjar, which we talked about quite a bit; even places like Hasakah and Kisik Junction, that have gotten somewhat less attention in the media but have important strategic objectives associated with them.  Kisik Junction, in particular, is a key supply route for ISIL to Mosul. So cutting off that junction was a successful effort by Iraqi security forces, and it was something that they undertook with the support of coalition military airpower.  And that is an indication that this strategy of asking these local ground forces to take responsibility for the security situation in their own country has ultimately made important progress.
Q    And on Prime Minister Netanyahu, I know lots has been made about the politization in the speech he’s giving, but to what extent, if any, do you think it’s helpful for the Prime Minister to take such a hard line, like skeptical line against the negotiations in terms of leverage at the bargaining table?  In other words, Iran is saying, well, this guy is going to demand a better deal.  Does that help the negotiation in any way?
MR. EARNEST:  Again, as I mentioned I think in response to Nadia’s question, I don't think that these comments will have much of an impact on this ultimate outcome.  The President has made very clear what this negotiated agreement must result in, and that is shutting down these four pathways to a nuclear weapon for Iran.  And that's the only way that we’ll be able to reach an agreement.  And that is the baseline, and that is something that Iran will have to make a decision about whether or not they're willing to agree to.
And again, the way that we will successfully complete these negotiations is not just by satisfying those concerns, but also putting in place a strict regime to verify Iran’s compliance with the agreement.
Q    And finally, do you know if the President is following the news of the shooting in LA of the homeless man, and if there’s any reaction so far?
MR. EARNEST:  No reaction that I’m aware of at this point.  I know that this is something that obviously local authorities are devoting significant time to investigating.
Q    Is he following the story, do you know ?
MR. EARNEST:  I haven’t talked to him about it.
Q    Thanks, Josh.
MR. EARNEST:  Ed.
Q    Josh, it sounds like one of the things Senator McCain was suggesting in his comments was that the heads of Arab states are warning him and others privately -- he may be wrong; we weren’t in on those conversations -- but are warning him that they may develop their own nuclear weapons if they don't like this nuclear deal that's emerging with Iran.  In your answers to Tommy were you suggesting the White House is okay with a potential nuclear arms race in the Mideast?
MR. EARNEST:  No, Ed.  In fact, I’ve indicated that one of our objectives here is to prevent a nuclear arms race in the Middle East.  This is one of the concerns that we have about Iran’s nuclear program, that if they were to acquire a nuclear weapon, it would likely set off a nuclear arms race in one of the most volatile regions of the world.  So that wouldn’t be good for the world.  It certainly wouldn’t be good for our closest ally in the region.  But most importantly, it wouldn’t be good for the United States of America.
Q    And so given that and what you said earlier about how you think a nuclear deal with Iran would bring in inspectors and would be very tough on Iran, why did the head of the IAEA today come out and say that Iran is being very slow in their cooperation?
MR. EARNEST:  Well, Ed, the fact is there were a lot of skeptics at the beginning of this effort when we put in place the Joint Plan of Action.  So you’ll recall this is essentially the interim agreement that went into effect a little over a year ago. And in the context of this interim agreement, the international community was able to roll back Iran’s nuclear program, that we have in a verifiable way confirmed that they eliminated their stockpile of highly enriched uranium.
Q    On that one point, you're saying, we verified that, right?  The head of the IAEA today said, “The agency is not in a position to provide credible assurance about the absence of undeclared nuclear material and activities in Iran and therefore to conclude that all nuclear material in Iran is for peaceful activities.”  That flies in the fact of what you just said?
MR. EARNEST:  Well, Ed, what we have confirmed is that Iran has lived up to their agreement as a part of the Joint Plan of Action.  And that is confirmed based on the --
Q    How do you confirm that?  You confirmed that on your own?  Because this is Iran’s -- this is the U.N. nuclear watchdog saying they haven’t been able to verify that.  So can you explain how has the U.S. verified that without the U.N.?
MR. EARNEST:  In the context of the Joint Plan of Action, our international inspectors have gotten very important access to Iran.  It’s essentially unprecedented access.  And we have been able to confirm that they have complied with the Joint Plan of Action.  And that is -- this is critically important because you’ll recall that before the Joint Plan of Action was signed, even Prime Minister Netanyahu himself came out and said that it would be an historic mistake.  But the fact is we’ve succeeded in rolling back Iran’s nuclear program in the context of this agreement.  We’ve succeeded in maintaining international pressure on Iran sufficient to compel them to come to the negotiating table and actually engage in serious negotiations with the international community to resolve once and for all the international community’s concerns with their nuclear program.  That is clearly in the best interests of the United States.  It’s clearly in the best interests of Israel.  And it’s why we would encourage people to not criticize these agreements before they're even signed.
Q    And so to be clear, those were U.S. inspectors you're saying who got in?  Because the U.N. says they haven’t gotten in.
MR. EARNEST:  What I’m suggesting is that the international community has verified that Iran lived up to --
Q    But who, though?  What agency?
MR. EARNEST:  Through the -- the international community has verified that Iran has lived up to the commitments that they made in the context of the Joint Plan of Action.
Q    But I’m sorry.  I don't understand.  How do you define international community when the head of the U.N. watchdog said today we haven’t gotten in?
MR. EARNEST:  Well, I haven’t seen those specific comments.  But we can get back to you.
Q    Okay, he’s on camera saying that.  Okay, last thing.  I know there were reports over the weekend, the White House has dismissed it as rumors, that the President privately threatened the Israelis that if Israeli warplanes go in to try to attack Iran and try to eliminate their nuclear program, that the U.S. would somehow shoot down those warplanes.  I know you say that's not true.  But the President has not taken the military option off the table with Iran.  He traditionally does not with any country.
MR. EARNEST:  Correct.
Q    That you have to leave this option on the table.
MR. EARNEST:  Correct.
Q    Does Israel have the military option on the table?  Does the U.S. believe is it right and proper for Israel to have the military option on the table to take out Iran’s nuclear program?
MR. EARNEST:  Well, Ed, as I mentioned a couple of times in the context of this briefing, the Prime Minister of Israel is responsible for the national security of Israel.  And it certainly would be a judgment for him to make about whether or not Iran -- whether or not Israel should use their military capability --
Q    The United States would not interfere with that?  You're saying it would be a decision by the Israeli Prime Minister and the U.S. would not interfere if Israel decided that they wanted to use military --
MR. EARNEST:  Well, ultimately decisions about Israel’s national security should be made by the Israeli Prime Minister.  However, as the United States does when we’re pursuing our national security interests, we consult closely with our allies, and we would expect our allies to do the same. 
Chris.
Q    Thanks, Josh.  On the plane ride here for Benjamin Netanyahu, some reporters have said that aides said he has certain details of the talks with Iran, and that in fact he will use that information to share his concerns with Congress.  And today, in Geneva, Secretary Kerry said the U.S. is concerned by those reports that selected details of the negotiations over those talks could be somehow revealed.  Was that a warning to Benjamin Netanyahu?  And how concerned is the administration about that?
MR. EARNEST:  Well, Chris, on a couple of occasions I’ve said from here that we’ve been concerned by the way that some officials in the Israeli government -- obviously they’re unnamed officials in the Israeli government, at least that’s how they appear in these media reports -- the way that they have used information that’s been shared by the United States or other sources to try to cherry-pick some facts about those negotiations in a way that radically distorts the negotiating position of the United States and our international partners.  That is counterproductive and certainly something that we are not appreciative of, to put it mildly. 
I will say, that those reports come just a week or two -- I'm talking about the recent comments of the Israeli official on the plane -- come just a week or two after Israeli officials were also complaining in the media that they weren’t being kept in the loop about the status of the negotiations.  So that may raise some questions about the credibility of these sources. 
The fact is, as I said at the time, that the United States has been providing our Israeli allies regular, detailed, classified briefings to give them the proper context about the progress that we’re making in the context of these conversations. The release of that information would betray the trust between our allies and it certainly is inconsistent with the behavior of trusted allies.  And that would be true even if these sources were to claim that they had obtained the information from somewhere else. 
Q    So given your comments and Secretary Kerry’s comments earlier today, that concern extends to the speech tomorrow by Benjamin Netanyahu?
MR. EARNEST:  Well, what is true in any context is that the release of this information that was provided to Israel, our allies, in the context of regular, detailed, classified briefings, that releasing that information would betray the trust that exists between two allies.  And that would be -- again, that would be true even if the Israelis were to claim that they had obtained that information from somewhere else.
Q    Will the President watch the speech tomorrow?
MR. EARNEST:  I haven’t looked at the President’s schedule for tomorrow.  I doubt that he will spend his whole time watching the speech.
Q    I’d like to ask you a couple quick things about the killing of Boris Nemtsov.  The French Foreign Minister today called for an investigation.  Does the President think -- does the administration believe that there’s any hope for a thorough investigation in this case? 
MR. EARNEST:  Well, Chris, let me just say that the United States condemns the brutal murder of Boris Nemtsov.  And we call upon the Russian government to conduct a prompt, impartial, and transparent investigation into the circumstances of his murder and ensure that those who were responsible for this vicious killing are brought to justice.
Mr. Nemtsov was a tireless advocate for his country, an opponent of corruption, and an advocate for human rights and greater transparency.  We offer our sincere condolences to Mr. Nemtsov’s family, and to the Russian people who have lost one of the most dedicated and eloquent defenders of their rights. 
Q    You say “prompt, impartial.”  I'm not sure if I remember the third word --
MR. EARNEST:  Transparent.
Q    Transparent investigation.  Do you believe there is any hope for that?
MR. EARNEST:  Well, we’ll see.  We’ll see.   
Q    Some possibility of that based on?  I'm just trying to figure out why you think that might be possible?
MR. EARNEST:  Well, given the stature that Mr. Nemtsov had attained, primarily because of his advocacy for the rights of the Russian people, that if ever there were a situation in which a prompt, impartial, and transparent investigation were warranted, this is certainly it.
Q    Gary Kasparov said yesterday -- obviously a former world chess champion, but also now a human rights advocate who lives in the United States, was asked if he would be going to the funeral of his friend and he said “I don’t buy one-way tickets.” And he talked about the chilling effect and the gloomy outlook for Russia’s political opposition.  Can you respond to those comments and what you think it means for anyone who in any way defies Vladimir Putin?
MR. EARNEST:  Well, I would say that the public demonstration that we saw on the streets of Moscow yesterday I think was a pretty powerful statement about the commitment of the Russian people to speak out and stand up for their rights.  And, again, that’s something for them to do, but that was a pretty powerful statement that they made that is probably more powerful than anything I can say from here on this issue. 
Major.
Q    If it's not prompt and partial and transparent -- the investigation -- then what?
MR. EARNEST:  Well, as I mentioned to Chris, we’ll see.  But obviously --
Q    What I'm driving at is would this, and a determination made about that, be folded into consideration here and possibly in Europe about more sanctions?  Would you tie this together with Ukraine?  
MR. EARNEST:  I think the simple answer to that question is that we have raised in a number of situations our concerns about the condition of human rights in Russia, and this is, sadly, only the latest chapter in a pretty long story. 
Q    But it's being viewed, as the demonstrations yesterday indicated, a singular event, and possibly a watershed moment in what is happening and what may in the future happen in Russia when it comes to everything that falls under the umbrella of human rights.  I'm just curious if this case by itself warrants inclusion and a conversation about extra sanctions against Russia if it is not resolved to the United States government’s satisfaction 
MR. EARNEST:  Well, I'm not prepared to say that from here, at least right now.  But what we certainly are going to be focused on is making very clear our view that this brutal murder merits a prompt, impartial and transparent investigation. 
Q    You mentioned a few moments ago that what happened Friday on DHS is an example of failed House leadership.  Are you suggesting there needs to be a new Speaker?
MR. EARNEST:  Not at all.  That’s the responsibility of members of the House of Representatives to decide who should be the leader of the House of Representatives.  That’s not a decision that I anticipate that the President or anybody else is going to weigh in on.
Q    Then why use that particular language to describe what happened?
MR. EARNEST:  Because there was a choice for those who are leading the House of Representatives about whether or not to put on the floor a short-term extension of the Department of Homeland Security.  Funding the department in that way is something that the Secretary of Homeland Security has been very critical of.  It inhibits the ability of the department to plan and make the kinds of investments that they believe are critical to our homeland security.  That was one option that was on the table.  The other option was full year funding bill that reflected bipartisan compromise about the appropriate levels of funding for that agency.  And the Republican leadership made the wrong choice about which bill to put on the floor.
Q    Right.  But if you, on the one hand, hold up Republicans to the constitutional obligation and privilege of funding the government, but on the other hand, criticize them when it does that -- I mean, it is their prerogative to fund the government in whatever way they choose, though it may fall in disfavor with this White House.  I mean, what’s -- I guess what I'm getting at is, their sort of going through this very public process of trying to sort this out -- calling it failed leadership doesn’t give them much space to do that. 
MR. EARNEST:  But this is not a tough one, Major.  All the hard work has been done on this.  As I mentioned earlier, at the end of last year Democrats and Republicans on Capitol Hill sat down, they worked with the administration to determine what are the appropriate levels of funding for the Department of Homeland Security and all of the responsibilities they have to execute. Whether it's funding the Secret Service, or cybersecurity, or protecting our ports, there are programs to go along with all of that.  And it was the responsibility of members of Congress to work in bipartisan fashion to determine the appropriate level of funding for all those programs, and they did.  They successfully completed that effort.  And there is strong bipartisan support for it on Capitol Hill. 
And when an initiative like that that has strong bipartisan support that’s so critical to the homeland security of the United States of America, it does reflect failed leadership when it isn’t put to a vote of the members of the House of Representatives, particularly when you know it’s going to pass with bipartisan support.
So, again, passing a seven-day extension is certainly better than allowing the Department of Homeland Security to shut down.  But when they had an opportunity to pass a full year funding bill without any extraneous, politically motivated riders, that's an opportunity they should have taken.  And they should have taken it last week.
I guess the one silver lining in all of this is that on the Senate side they have already passed this bipartisan full year funding bill.  And if it’s put to a vote in the House this week, it will pass.  Hopefully that's what will happen.
Q    Two quick ones on Iran.  To follow up on what Ed said, I want to make sure that -- and I get whatever your assessment is of who these international community inspectors were that were not members of the IAEA, first of all.  And I’m just curious if it’s possible in the administration’s comprehension of the Joint Plan of Action that Iran could comply and the IAEA could say it hasn’t seen everything it would like to see.
MR. EARNEST:  Well, I haven’t seen the comments of the IAEA chief, so it’s hard for me to respond to what was just said.
Q    Okay.  And Jonathan raised the question of Congress having ultimate approval over whatever deal, if one is achieved. Isn’t that baked into the cake, though?  Because you can't remove the sanctions without Congress approving that.  So at some point, Congress is going to have a role in rendering its verdict on this deal -- maybe not in total, but on the economic sanctions portion of it, correct?
MR. EARNEST:  Yes, that is correct.  Now, here’s what this is -- I tried to explain this in the context of answering Jon’s question, so let me try one more time to make it a little bit more clear.  What we envision in a scenario where a deal is reached with Iran is not taking the step of relaxing a large number of sanctions that would free up substantial sums of money to go to Iran.  These are the sanctions that are affected by -- that were passed by Congress. 
What we envision is an agreement that puts in place a series of steps where Iran takes some steps to demonstrate their compliance with the agreement, and a little bit of sanctions relief is offered, and that that is the process that continues until we can have a lot of confidence in Iran’s willingness to live up to their end of the bargain.  And once they do, then we will ultimately get to a place where we want to start to make changes to the statutory sanctions regime that was passed by Congress. 
And, yes, removing those sanctions, as passed by Congress, would require an act of Congress and I do think could plausibly be interpreted as Congress signing off on the deal.  Regardless of how you interpret it, the fact of the matter is Congress has been an important player in this effort from the beginning.  They put in place the sanctions regime that compelled Iran to the negotiating table.  The administration has, throughout these negotiations, kept members of Congress in both parties informed of exactly the status of the negotiations.  And it’s why as we move forward in this process -- ultimately it’s closer to the end than the beginning -- that we're going to need Congress to weigh in on this.  And again, the reason for that is that the administration does not envision a scenario where substantial sanctions relief is offered right away.
Q    Substantial U.S. sanctions relief?
MR. EARNEST:  Correct.
Q    It could be sanctions relief from the other participants in the negotiations?
MR. EARNEST:  Well, all of this is part of a coordinated effort with the broader international community.  And so I wouldn't speculate about how this will be staged other than to say that the United States is going to expect Iran to demonstrate over a period of time compliance with this agreement before offering substantial sanctions relief, particularly on the scale of the significant sanctions that Congress passed and put in place. 
JC.
Q    A bit of a perceptive and historical question.  Iran has been suffering under sanctions from the West since Jimmy Carter’s administration, when the hostages were taken.  What makes you feel -- or does the administration know that these sanctions really -- all of these sanctions, including right now  -- are having any real effect on Iran and their disposition towards a nuclear exploration, say?
MR. EARNEST:  Well, a couple of things about that, JC.  The first I would say is that many economic analysts have observed that the Iranian economy has taken a substantial hit since the sanctions regime was put in place.  That’s everything from the value of their currency to the economic growth projections for the future.  All those things took a negative hit once this sanctions regime was put in place, and those who understand these details a lot better than I do have characterized this sanctions regime as one of the most stringent sanctions regime that’s been put in place against any country in history.
So what we also know is that Iran has decided to engage in a set of serious negotiations, that previously Iran had just used diplomatic negotiations as cover to try to make progress on their nuclear program.  But in the context of these talks, we’ve actually succeeded in not just halting Iran’s progress as it relates to their nuclear program but actually rolling it back in several key areas, including reducing and eliminating their stockpile of highly enriched uranium.
So I think the evidence indicates that this sanctions regime has been effective.
Fred.
Q    Thanks, Josh.  Last week I asked if there might be some type of informal meeting on the side with the two administration representatives.  You said you weren’t sure that they’d be there on the same day as the Prime Minister.  They are today.  Do you know if there will be -- and if not, why not?  I mean, what would be the harm in some sort of meeting?
MR. EARNEST:  Well, a couple of things on this, Fred.  Obviously, the Prime Minister spoke shortly after Ambassador Power completed her remarks.  But I know that they did not have a meeting on the sidelines there.  Some of that I think is related to the fact that the Prime Minister was scheduled to speak shortly after she completed her remarks.  There wasn’t time for a meeting.
But I’ll also point out that the administration has, as we’ve discussed quite a bit over the last several weeks, gone to great lengths to make sure that the administration was not perceived as interfering in an upcoming Israeli election.  So, as you know, Prime Minister Netanyahu is on the ballot in just a couple of weeks, and the President and other senior members of the administration are not meeting with him on this trip to the U.S. because we want to avoid even the appearance of interfering in a democratic election in another country, in this case, Israel.
Q    And on a separate issue, last week there were reports about the ATF is looking at banning a certain type of ammo for automatic weapons.  The administration had advocated some type of ban or restriction on automatic weapons in 2013 that didn’t go through Congress.  Is this sort of an executive -- a way of doing executively what Congress wouldn’t do previously?
MR. EARNEST:  Well, Fred, I don’t know that Congress has considered this specific provision.  The President has long believed that there are some common-sense steps that we can take to -- and when I say “we,” I mean the federal government, including Congress -- that we can take to ensure that we’re protecting the Second Amendment rights of law-abiding Americans while also taking some common-sense steps to prevent people who shouldn’t have guns from getting them. 
And in this case, we’re talking about an ATF proposal that’s being considered through its standard process and it’s open now for public comment.  For specific questions about that, I’d refer you to the ATF. 
But it would be fair to say, as I mentioned, that we are looking at additional ways to protect our brave men and women in law enforcement and believe that this process is valuable for that reason alone.  This seems to be an area where everyone should agree that if there are armor-piercing bullets available that can fit into easily concealed weapons, that it puts our law enforcement at considerably more risk.
So I’d put this in the category of common-sense steps that the government can take to protect the Second Amendment rights of law-abiding Americans while also making sure that our law enforcement officers who are walking the beat every day can do their jobs just a little bit more safely.
Cheryl, I’ll give you the last one.
Q    Okay, thanks.  A number of groups today sent a letter to the White House, a new letter but it’s an old issue, asking the President to issue an executive order that would require government or federal contractors to disclose political contributions.  Would the President be open to that?
MR. EARNEST:  Well, this is an issue that we have talked about at some length, as you know.  I don’t have any news to make on this particular issue, but I know that there are a number of advocates out there who do believe that this is one way that we could try to introduce some greater transparency into our political system, particularly when it comes to political campaign contributions.
But at this point, I don’t have any news on that.
Thanks, everybody.  Have a good Monday.
END   

	1:55 P.M. EST
The White House
Office of the Press Secretary
James S. Brady Press Briefing Room
2:14 P.M. EST
MR. EARNEST:  Good afternoon, everybody.  You all just had an opportunity to hear from the President about his reaction to the speech from Prime Minister Netanyahu this afternoon.  And I’m here to take your questions on that or any other topics that are on your mind today.
Nedra, would you like to get us started?
Q    I would, Josh.  Thanks.  Did anyone here at the White House authorize or raise any objections to Secretary Clinton using her personal email account while at the State Department?
MR. EARNEST:  Well, Nedra, what I can tell you is that very specific guidance has been given to agencies all across the government, which is specifically that employees of the Obama administration should use their official email accounts when they’re conducting official government business.  However, when there are situations where personal email accounts are used, it is important for those records to be preserved consistent with the Federal Records Act. 
In fact, the President signed into law a bill at the end of last year clarifying the guidelines for how those personal emails can be properly stored and maintained.  This is part of why the State Department has asked all of the previous Secretaries of State who have used any email as they were conducting official U.S. business to send their emails to the State Department so they could be properly preserved and maintained. 
Secretary Clinton’s team, in response to that request, reviewed her emails and complied with that request by sending all of the emails on her personal account that pertained to her official responsibilities as Secretary of State.  They did that even though many of the records were already maintained on the State’s system because those records were emails between the Secretary of State and State Department employees using their official government email address.
Q    So are you saying that her use of her personal email, solely, was appropriate, or was it in violation of this policy?
MR. EARNEST:  Well, what you should do is that you should check with the State Department who is responsible for administering this policy.  But the policy, as a general matter, allows individuals to use their personal email address as long as those emails are maintained and sent to the State Department -- which, if you ask Secretary Clinton’s team, that’s what they completed in the last month or two.
Q    And given that’s she not the first person to use personal emails, does there need to be some sort of system for archiving personal emails of high-ranking government officials like this?
MR. EARNEST:  Well, that is part of this law that I referred to that the President signed into law at the end of last year -- that is does establish clear guidelines for how individuals, if they are using their personal email to conduct official business, can ensure that those records are properly maintained.
Now, the official guidance that we offer to administration employees -- and it’s certainly the guidance that I have followed here personally when I’ve been at the White House -- is that I use my official government email address when I’m conducting official government business.  It saves me the additional step of having to take a personal email and forward it to my government email so that it can be properly maintained.
Now, it’s not incredibly uncommon for one of you, or one of your colleagues, to send an email to my personal address.  A few of you have it.  But when I do that, I will answer the emails -- which I try to be pretty good about doing -- but then I will take that response and forward the email to my official account so that the record of that email exchange can be properly preserved.
Q   Can you respond to the announcement from the House that they will vote on a Homeland Security funding bill without restrictions?
MR. EARNEST:  Well, Nedra, as you heard me say yesterday, the White House has been urging the Congress for months now to do the right thing, and that is pass a full-year funding bill for the Department of Homeland Security that does not include any politically motivated riders.  And the benefit of that is, is that it will allow the Department of Homeland Security to plan and take the necessary steps to protect the American people.  And at the end of last year, Democrats and Republicans on Capitol Hill got together and worked to hammer out an agreement about the appropriate funding levels for that agency.
That agreement was reached at the end of last year.  But for several months now, congressional Republicans have prevented votes on that compromise because they were trying to figure out a way that they could capitalize on a political opportunity.  The fact is, trying to politicize something as fundamental to our national security as funding for the Department of Homeland Security is completely inappropriate.  And we are pleased that congressional leaders in the House have apparently relented, they’ve abandoned the search for political advantage, and are instead just trying to move forward to do the right thing, which is to fully fund the Department of Homeland Security.
Roberta.
Q    When Secretary Clinton was using her private email address to do her work as Secretary, was the White House Counsel’s Office aware of that?  And did it sanction that?
MR. EARNEST:  Well, the responsibility for ensuring that agency records are properly preserved and maintained is the responsibility of agency officials in coordination with the National Archives and Records Administration.  This is a fairly bureaucratic function, but yet an important one.  These records need to be maintained for a variety of reasons.  One is that it’s not hard to imagine that historians in the future will want to review these records to conduct their academic analysis about things that occurred in the administration.  The records also need to be preserved and maintained so that legitimate requests, either from private citizens or from Congress, to review that information can be fulfilled.
So it’s the responsibility of the agencies to maintain their own records management plan, if you will, but they certainly do that in close coordination with the experts at NARA, at the National Archives and Records Administration.
Q   So White House officials that she may have been emailing with, they didn’t raise this at any point in time as you might want to use your official government -- or why aren’t you using your officials account?  Was it just okay with everybody?
MR. EARNEST:  Well, as I pointed out, Roberta, in response to Nedra’s question, it is the responsibility of agencies to preserve those records, even when those records exist on a personal email account.  That is why, in order to make it easier for everybody and to avoid circumstances where an individual may forget to forward an email, we encourage people to use their official government email account when they’re conducting official government business.  However, when a personal email account is involved, the law suggests -- or the law mandates, in fact, that that record be properly preserved, and that can be done by forwarding it to an official government email where it can be preserved on the system.
Again, that’s what Secretary Clinton’s team did, was they reviewed her personal emails to capture all of those that pertained to the conduct of official U.S. business and sent them to the State Department so they could be properly maintained.  And, in fact, I understand that hundreds of those records have actually already been provided to Congress in response to a legitimate congressional oversight request.
So that, I think, reflects a commitment on the part of the State Department to not just following the Federal Records Act, but also coordinating and complying with legitimate requests from congressional oversight committees. 
Q    Are there security concerns, though, with a high-ranking official like the Secretary of State using a personal email address for official business?
MR. EARNEST:  Well, again, for the specific protocols that are in place at the State Department, you should check with the experts at the State Department.  These are their rules for them to manage.  The President, what he insists that all the agencies do is live up to the obligations that they have under the Federal Records Act.
Michelle.
Q    Well, how do you feel about those rules?  Wouldn’t that rule then allow a big space for emails to not be preserved if the use of a personal email on a regular basis is even allowed and thought to be okay long term?
MR. EARNEST:  Well, again, Michelle, the guidance that we have certainly given to everybody who works here at the White House -- and I think this is consistent with the guidance that federal employees at agencies across the government have received -- is that they should use their official email account when they’re conducting official government business. 
On those instances in which official business is conducted on personal email accounts, it's important for those records, those personal emails, to be forwarded to the agency so that they can be properly maintained.  In most cases, at least here at the White House, it's as simple as just forwarding it to your official government account so that those emails can be properly maintained and preserved.
Q    But that’s a personal responsibility.  And do you think that the rules need to be tightened up since it seems to leave a big gap there in who’s going to forward that email and who’s going to make sure that that email is forwarded?
MR. EARNEST:  Well, I think the law is pretty clear about what’s necessary to comply, which is that it's important to ensure that those emails that may exist on one’s personal email account are properly maintained.  And again, that is why we saw the State Department take the step of asking all of the former Secretaries of State who have used email as they’ve done their work to review their personal email in search of records that relate to the conduct of official U.S. business. 
And Secretary Clinton’s team complied with that request by reviewing her personal email, pulling together all of the ones that were related to her official work as a Secretary of State, and forward it to the State Department so that they could preserve and maintain those records and, in fact, use them to respond to legitimate requests from Congress.
Q    Okay.  And the speech we just heard from Prime Minister Netanyahu, his whole premise of hating this potential deal was that Iran is such a threat, it can’t be trusted really under any means.  Do you think that he overstated that threat on the basis that a deal is being worked out?  And do you think that he did betray the trust between allies, as you put it, because he discussed some key points of that potential deal?
MR. EARNEST:  Well, Michelle, let me take the first part first, which is I think Susan Rice, the National Security Advisor, had a rather cogent way of summarizing our approach to this deal:  Distrust and verify.  As she laid out, and even as the President relayed in his comments in the Oval Office, there are a variety of reasons to not trust the Iranians.  There are numerous examples of the Iranians not being honest with the international community about their nuclear program.  There are a variety of examples of that.  One, and in some ways, the best example of that is the nuclear facility at Fordow that the United States and our allies revealed early on in the President’s tenure in office, back in 2009.
So that is why, as the President mentioned in the Oval Office, any sort of deal that the United States signs on to will include historically significant verification measures.  We're talking about detailed verification measures that would include, of course, as you would expect, the routine inspection of nuclear facilities in Iran, but it would also expand to things like regular inspections of uranium mines that exist in Iran, regular inspection of manufacturing facilities that are related to nuclear equipment that are critical to the functioning of their nuclear program.  We're talking about an in-depth, rigorous inspections regime that can verify for the international community that Iran is living up to their end of the deal.
Now, the second part of your question was related to?
Q    This idea that he was talking about, these points of a potential deal.   Should he not have done that?  Was that a betrayal of trust?
MR. EARNEST:  Well, again, the Israeli Prime Minister is allowed to make the decisions, as I referred to yesterday -- is allowed to make the decisions about what he’s going to say based on his own assessment about the best interests of Israeli national security.  That's his responsibility as the politically democratically elected leader of Israel.
But the President has made clear that there are other concerns in mind, principally ensuring that the relationship between the United States and Israel isn't subjected to the turbulence of partisan politics.  And that's why the President has chosen a somewhat different approach.  It's why the President is not meeting with the Prime Minister on this visit to the United States.  But it does not reflect any change in this administration’s or this country’s commitment to Israel’s national security.
Zeke.
Q    Thanks, Josh.  Going back to the emails.  The President is a noted emailer-in-chief.  Has he ever emailed with former Secretary of State Clinton?  Did they email when she was in office?
MR. EARNEST:  Zeke, you won't be surprised to hear that I'm not going to talk in a lot of detail about emails that are sent to or from the President of the United States.  But I will tell you as a general matter, two things.  The first is that the President’s emails are subject to the Presidential Records Act, which does have -- which is a little bit different than the Federal Records Act.  Hopefully, you guys aren't going to quiz me on that.  But they are subjected to the Presidential Records Act that does require those records to be preserved and maintained.  They have obvious scholarly value in the future. 
The second point that I'll make about that is that if Secretary Clinton did email the President of the United States, that under that protocol, those records would have been preserved.  And, again, I think that sort of highlights the situation that Secretary Clinton’s team encountered, which is that a large number of the records that they reviewed in response to the State Department request were records that already existed on the State Department’s system because they were emails between her and State Department employees with StateDepartment.gov email addresses.
Q    Well, when somebody in the White House, in the West Wing, had an email to send to the Secretary of State, did they just use her private email account?  She didn’t have a State Department email account.  How did they get in contact with her?  Did that never raise a flag inside the West Wing?
MR. EARNEST:  Well, Zeke, what I’ll tell you is that during her four years as Secretary of State, she and I did not trade emails, so I do not know what her email address is.  But I can tell you that if there were emails between Secretary Clinton and White House officials, and I’m pretty confident that there were some emails, those emails weren’t just protected by -- or maintained by the White House email system; those emails were reviewed by Secretary Clinton’s team, and they were sent to the State Department so they could properly maintained on their system as well.  And, again, that is consistent with the requirements of the Federal Records Act.
Q    The domain that the Secretary used apparently to send these emails was registered just a week before the President took office.  The same day her confirmation hearings in the Senate began, it seemed that this was setup for the express purpose of being the vehicle for her to use email while she was serving as Secretary of State.  For the President who has openly said multiple times, most-transparent administration in history, was this a conversation that they had before she took office?  Was this something that anyone in this White House ever flagged for her?  And is this consistent with the President’s promise to make this a transparent administration?
MR. EARNEST:  Well, Zeke, I’m not aware of all the mechanics that went into setting up the email system that you have just described.  I would encourage you to check with Secretary Clinton’s team or somebody over at the State Department.  But, again, what the President has insisted on from the beginning of his administration, as you alluded to, is a commitment to, among other things, making sure that emailed communication, to the extent that they are official government records, are properly preserved and maintained, both so that in the future they can be reviewed by historians, but also so that they can be used when necessary to respond to legitimate requests from Congress or the public to review those records.
Q    And just one last one.  You said that the Secretary’s staff reviewed and turned over 55,000 pages of emails.  That’s not 55,000 emails.  And why should the American people take her word or her staff’s word for it?  Why is there no independent review?  By going through this process, she set it up that it’s on her word or on her staff’s word that these are the only emails pertaining to her official business at the State Department.  Why should anybody take that at face value?  Why shouldn’t there be some system in place to have an independent arbiter of that information?
MR. EARNEST:  Well, Zeke, in terms of the number -- the 55,000 number is something I’ve seen reported.  I haven’t verified that number, so I’ve been careful to avoid using it.  I don’t know if that refers to pages or emails or what.  I’m not disputing the number; I’m just saying I don’t know what the number is.  I know that there were a large number of records that numbered in the thousands that were turned over by Secretary Clinton’s team at the request of the State Department.  Again, this was a request the State Department had made to previous Secretaries of State, all previous Secretaries of State in both parties. 
And, again, in the same way that Secretary Clinton’s team reviewed her personal email to make sure that they were forwarding on to the State Department emails that relate to her conduct of official U.S. business, the same is true of those Secretaries of State who served in a Republican administration. 
And, ultimately, that is what the law requires -- is that if an individual used a personal email account for official U.S. business, that that information, that record should be sent and maintained in the system that’s been setup by that specific agency.  And that is why, frankly, we encourage people -- a lot of people don’t have a team like Secretary Clinton does -- that’s why we encourage them to not rely on remembering to forward a personal email to your government system, but to actually just use the official government system that’s set up so you can ensure that those records are properly maintained and preserved.
Major.
Q    There have been a lot of descriptions today of what Secretary Clinton may or may not have done -- violated the law, skirted the law, complied.  Where do you come down?
MR. EARNEST:  I come down wherever the State Department attorney comes down.  Ultimately, it’s the responsibility of the State Department to ensure compliance with these rules.
Q    This is the President’s administration, though.
MR. EARNEST:  Of course it is.  And that’s why we’ve been very clear about what sort of guidance these agencies should be following.  But each of them, I think understandably, implements these guidelines in their own way that reflect the unique challenges and responsibilities of that agency’s employees.  So it’s the responsibility at the agency level for compliance to be determined.  They do that in coordination with the National Archives and Records Administration. 
But, ultimately, it’s their policy to implement and their policy to evaluate whether or not or how individuals should comply with those guidelines.  And, again, this is what prompted the request from the State Department to previously-serving Secretaries of State to forward onto them records that may have been kept in their personal email account.
Q    I’m not trying to be cute here, but lots of people work for this administration, this is an ongoing topic of conversation, I know there’s a new law, but can you venture a conclusion or will you offer a conclusion as to whether or not the Secretary broke the law, skirted the law, or complied with the law, based on what we know so far?
MR. EARNEST:  Again, Major, the guidelines that are laid out under the Federal Records Act require that records that are maintained -- that pertain to official government business, that do reside in one’s personal email account, should be turned over to agency officials so that those records can be properly maintained and preserved.
Q    And can you make a judgment as to whether or not you believe the Secretary has complied with that guidance?
MR. EARNEST:  Well, again, I know that Secretary Clinton’s team has indicated that they complied with that guidance.  I know that the Secretary of -- or the Department of State has made the request and has received what Secretary Clinton’s team put together.  But, ultimately, it’s the responsibility of those two parties to assess how and whether this is within the guidelines of what is required. 
But, again, what Secretary Clinton’s team has said is that they reviewed the emails, and they took the emails that were related to her official work as the Secretary of State and sent them to the State Department.
Q    For the public’s benefit and in the name of transparency, will you call on the State Department to release these emails publicly?  The non-classified ones?
MR. EARNEST:  Well, Major, I know that there are a number of these emails that have already -- well, first of all, I don’t know that any of them are classified.  But I know that a number of these emails have already been produced to Congress as it relates to congressional -- legitimate congressional oversight request.
I don’t know exactly what the rules are under the Freedom of Information Act for the State Department.  But certainly if you’re interested in seeing those emails, that would be the avenue that I would recommend.
Q    Back to Netanyahu’s speech.  Did the Prime Minister say anything in his characterization of what Iran’s behavior has been, or is likely to be, that the administration disagrees with?
MR. EARNEST:  Well, I think it depends.  What Prime Minister Netanyahu did detail at some length are the reasons that the international community does distrust promises that are made by Iran’s leaders.  There is no doubt that Iran has done things, like routinely supported and continues to support terrorism around the globe, most of it in the region, but also around the globe.
There is no arguing, as the President pointed out, with the fact that Iran has menaced our closest ally in the region, repeatedly, including using some vile anti-Semitic language.  There’s also no question, and I don’t think that Prime Minister Netanyahu raised this, but there are also some American citizens who are currently being unjustly held in Iran. 
So the list of concerns that we have with Iran is lengthy, and several of the items at the top of that list are significant.  But what we know is that it is important for Iran not to obtain a nuclear weapon, because obtaining a nuclear weapon would only strengthen their hand as they try to do the other bad things that they do.  That if Iran has a nuclear weapon and they’re supporting terrorism, it makes their support for terror groups even more dangerous.  If Iran has a nuclear weapon and they are menacing Israel, that makes those threats even more dangerous.
And the fact is, if Iran obtains a nuclear weapon and they unjustly detain American citizens in their country, it makes it harder to get those citizens back.  So that is why the President has made as his priority resolving the broader international community’s concerns with their nuclear program. 
And the strategy that the President has laid out is one that we can count on to best resolve our concerns with their program.  If we can put in place very tough monitoring requirements and extend the breakout time to one year, that’s the best way, that’s the best possible way to resolve the international community’s concerns with their nuclear program. 
The alternative that was advocated by Prime Minister Netanyahu and others falls far short of that.  Military action we know would fall far short of that.  Additional sanctions that would cause our international coalition to crumble would fall far short of that. 
The strategy that the President has laid out is the one that has the best likelihood of success and is the one that can best resolve the concerns of the international community.  The only X factor is whether Iran is going to sign on to an agreement that does all of those things. 
And that is why all along we have continued to place the likelihood of success of this particular path at 50/50.  But because of the potential benefits that lie at the end of this path, that’s why the President believes it's one that’s worth pursuing.
Q    As you may be aware, the Prime Minister said, the alternative isn’t military action or doesn’t necessarily need to be; it's a better deal.  Meaning, force Iran to dismantle its underlying nuclear technology so it can’t have this capability and can’t have a breakout potential.  Is the Prime Minister describing a world that he imagines but that doesn’t actually exist?
MR. EARNEST:  It certainly is not a plausible outcome in the minds of the United States.  And what is a plausible outcome is an outcome that has Iran voluntarily rolling back key aspects of their program, that has Iran agreeing to a set of monitoring restrictions that would allow international experts routine and frequent access to their nuclear facilities so that they can confirm for themselves that Iran is living up to their end of the agreement. 
That is the best way for us to resolve the international community’s concerns with Iran’s nuclear program.
Q    Last question.  On the DHS funding, does the administration consider, as the legal challenges continue, that a vote by the House implicitly endorses the President’s executive actions on immigration?
MR. EARNEST:  No.  And the reason for that is simply I am confident that there are people -- or at least I would hope that there are members of Congress who don’t agree with the President’s executive actions but who do agree that we need to make sure that the Department of Homeland Security is properly and fully funded.
And we’ve said all along that these are two entirely separate issues.  If there are people who disagree with the President’s executive actions, we welcome a conversation with them about comprehensive immigration reform.  There is bipartisan ground for us to find.  There are some common-sense steps that we can take that will be good for our economy, that will ensure that we’re living up to our values as a nation of laws and a nation of immigrants.  There are things that we can do that would be even be good for the deficit and certainly would do more to take us away from the current system that is pretty much the closest thing that anybody can come up with to amnesty.
Jon.
Q    Yes, coming back, Major asked a very direct question.  I want to try it again, and I want to plead to you, please do not refer me to the State Department.  (Laughter.)  I’m going to ask you something about the White House, and my question is a very basic one.
MR. EARNEST:  Before you ask it, though, I will do my best to not refer you to the State Department, but I want you to remember, though, that it is the responsibility of the State Department, that agency, to maintain their email system and to ensure the employees there are in compliance with the Federal Records Act.
Q    Okay.  So my direct question is:  Does the White House believe that Hillary Clinton broke the law?  Yes or no. 
MR. EARNEST:  Jon, the --
Q    You’re not going to refer me to the State Department.
MR. EARNEST:  No, I’m not.  I’m going to do my best to answer your question.  And Secretary Clinton’s team has said that, at the request of the State Department, they have reviewed her records to make sure --
Q    I know what her team has said.  I’m just asking, does the White House believe that Hillary Clinton broke the law, or that she fully complied with the law?  What does the White House believe?  Does the President believe that his former Secretary of State broke the law, or that she fully complied with the law?
MR. EARNEST:  Jon, if, in fact -- and again, you will have to go and verify this, and the State Department will have to verify this because we’re talking about --
Q    You can’t give me a direct answer to this?
MR. EARNEST:  Just give me a chance.  That if, in fact, what Secretary Clinton’s team said they were going to do, that they did, and that can be verified by the State Department who is responsible for maintaining these records, that would be entirely consistent with what the Federal Records Act requires.
So again, I’m not in a position -- I was not in a position to review Secretary Clinton’s personal email.  That was the responsibility of Secretary Clinton and her team.  That’s what they say that they did.  They say that they turned over thousands of pages and thousands of emails, including many that were already on the State Department system.  And that entirely consistent with the requirements of the Federal Records Act.
Q    Okay.  Well, let me ask you about something that was said at the podium in June of 2011.  This is while Hillary Clinton was Secretary of State.  Jay Carney, your predecessor, said, “All our work is conducted on work email accounts.  We are definitely instructed that we need to conduct all of our work on government accounts.” 
MR. EARNEST:  And I think that he was asked specifically about White House staffers, because there were questions that were raised about some work of White House staffers.
Q    I can go back and look, but he said, “While U.S. government policy -- certainly the administration policy -- that is effective here is that all of our work has to be conducted on work email accounts.”  So was the White House unaware that Hillary Clinton was not conducting her work on work email accounts when Jay said that?
MR. EARNEST:  I certainly don’t know whether or not Jay had traded emails with Secretary Clinton.  But --
Q    But he was speaking as the spokesperson for the White House.
MR. EARNEST:  Yes.  And at the time there were very -- there was clear guidance that was given to White House staffers that is consistent with the guidance that agencies give to their employees, which is that official U.S. government work should be conducted on official U.S. government email systems. 
Q    So why was Hillary Clinton not abiding by that guidance?
MR. EARNEST:  But when there are situations in which personal email is used to conduct official U.S. business, those emails are official government records and should be turned over to the State Department, which is what I understand Secretary Clinton’s team has done.
Q    But now we know that she didn’t even have an official email account; that all of her email -- personal, official, all of it -- was done on a non-government email account. 
MR. EARNEST:  Well, again, the State Department is the one that’s responsible for maintaining their email records, so you’ll have to beg my forgiveness for --
Q    But we were told that government work was done on government emails.  That, I guess, was not correct.
MR. EARNEST:  What I’m saying is that is the guidance that we give to employees -- again, because it is just more -- it saves you a step.  Federal employees in this administration work very hard, and the last thing we need to do is to ask them to take an additional step and make sure that they are --
Q    Well, Hillary never took that step.  She didn’t take that step until almost two years after she left office.
MR. EARNEST:  Hillary Clinton -- Secretary Clinton benefits from something that most federal government employees don’t have, which is a team around them that can review those emails and make sure that all of the emails that relate to her official government work can be properly sent to the State Department so that they can be maintained and preserved.
Q    So the basic question is:  Were people in the White House, senior officials in the White House -- Zeke asked about the President; you’re not going to talk about the President -- but were senior officials in the White House aware that Hillary Clinton was skirting this requirement and using her own personal email account?
MR. EARNEST:  I don’t think it is fair for you to characterize it that way.
Q    Well, you just acknowledged that the agencies were given guidance that they had to use -- they were to use work email for work business.
MR. EARNEST:  But there are situations, and when there are situations where personal email is used --
Q    This wasn’t a minor exception.  This was all of her work.
MR. EARNEST:  Okay.  But the point is, Jon, is making sure that the records can be properly maintained and preserved.  And Secretary Clinton’s team has taken the necessary steps. According to them -- you should go ask them to confirm this -- but according to them, that’s what they have done.
Q    But that’s two years after she left office.  She was also doing this while she was Secretary of State.  She didn’t turn the emails until she was out of office for 22 months. 
MR. EARNEST:  But the responsibility that Secretary Clinton and previous Secretaries of States have is to make sure that they have looked at their personal email account, collected all of the emails that relate to official government business -- because those are then, by definition, official government records, and those records need to be sent to the State Department so that they can be properly preserved and maintained in coordination with the National Archives and Records Administration. 
And I understand that the State Department has, in response to a legitimate congressional request, turned over some of those records to Congress.  That is the proper handling of those specific government records -- that they are maintained at the State Department and, when necessary, are used to respond to legitimate congressional requests.
Q    Okay, last question.  Is any other Cabinet member in this administration using solely personal emails for government business?  Or is Hillary Clinton the one and only one who did that?
MR. EARNEST:  You will need to check with each of the Cabinet agencies about --
Q    You can’t tell me if there are other Cabinet secretaries who are using personal email accounts for official business?
MR. EARNEST:  Again, the Cabinet secretaries -- you’ll have to ask the individual agencies themselves, because it’s the agencies themselves that are responsible for maintaining the records at their agency, but also responsible for maintaining the email system at their agency.
Q    Have you heard of anybody, a senior official at the White House who just uses personal email?
MR. EARNEST:  I have not encountered that, no.  And I think most people handle it the way that I do, which is that we do our work on our official White House email address.  And on that rare occasion where we get an email to our personal account, we’ll be responsive but also make sure that it’s properly forwarded to our official White House government email address so that it can be properly preserved.
Q    So, I’m sorry, did you find it odd then to learn that the Secretary of State was not doing that?  I mean, you’re very diligent about this, you keep your own records.  Did it surprise you -- the Secretary of State doesn’t do this?
MR. EARNEST:  Look, I'm not surprised by anything.  I’m not surprised by too many things in this job anymore.
So, Peter.
Q    Josh, can we go back to Netanyahu and Iran a little bit?
MR. EARNEST:  Sure.  (Laughter.) 
Q    Who knew that would be your favorite topic today.  (Laughter.)  It says something about the day. 
MR. EARNEST:  It does, doesn’t it?
Q    Can you tell us what the White House’s assessment of what the Prime Minister’s speech does in terms of the President’s ability to sell this deal on Capitol Hill?  If ultimately, if Iran -- if permanent sanctions, were they to mean -- these are two Republican houses that have now shown great enthusiasm and support for what Prime Minister Netanyahu said today.  Does that, in fact, kill the deal for President Obama if he can’t sell it to Congress?
MR. EARNEST:  Well, no.  Let me take this in a couple of different parts.  The first is, the President made pretty clear in the Oval Office when he was talking about this that he’s not focused on the politics or on the theater, he’s focused on resolving the threat from Iran’s nuclear program.  And so he is not going to be distracted from focusing on that threat and he’s hopeful that others won’t be either.
Now, the other thing that’s true is that there was a lot of talk from Prime Minister Netanyahu criticizing, and in some cases even outright condemning, a deal that hasn’t been struck, a deal that doesn’t exist.  So the fact of the matter is there will be ample opportunity for Congress and for the American public to review any agreement that’s struck between the Iranians and the international community, if such an agreement is struck.
Now, what we have said is that the odds of that happening are at best 50/50.  But if we are able to complete this path, and we are able to reach an agreement that extends significantly Iran’s breakout period and puts in place tough verification and inspection measures, then everybody will have an opportunity to evaluate the deal.  And at that point, we can have a discussion and maybe even a debate about whether or not the President is making the right judgment when he says that this is the best possible way for us to resolve the international community’s concerns with Iran’s nuclear program.  We’re confident that if the agreement is reached and it reflects the kinds of outlines that the President himself has laid out, that that’s the conclusion that fair-minded people will reach.
Q    We’re not talking about fair-minded people, we’re talking about Congress.  (Laughter.)
MR. EARNEST:  The transcript will reflect that you said that, not me.  (Laughter.)
Q    It's true on both sides, all sides.  And in this case, you’re going to have a situation where you’re in effect going to be asking Republicans to trust President Obama’s judgment over Prime Minister Netanyahu’s judgment.  Can you honestly say you think that’s a likely scenario?
MR. EARNEST:  Well, what I can say -- let me say a couple things about that.  The first is, the President is the one who’s responsible for looking out for American national security.  The Israeli Prime Minister himself acknowledged that he’s primarily focused on Israeli national security.
The good news is that because we’re such close allies and because we share such deep common values, that those interests almost always align.  But it does mean that Prime Minister Netanyahu is taking a look at this situation from a slightly different perspective than individuals, including those individuals in Congress, who should be principally focused on American national security.  So that’s the first thing.
The second thing is, members of Congress will have an opportunity to take a look at the agreement that’s been reached between the Iranians and the international community.  And the other thing I think that is relevant here is that we did see a fair amount of skepticism both from Prime Minister Netanyahu and from some Republicans on the Hill about the interim agreement that was put in place between the United States and Iran, the so-called Joint Plan of Action.
And this is an agreement that was put in place a little over a year ago that has been in place while these most recent negotiations have taken place.  And what that Joint Plan of Action did was it ensured daily access to Iranian nuclear facilities at Natanz and Fordow.  It essentially blocked the continued efforts to construct a heavy water reactor at Arak that would have provide a plutonium path to a nuclear weapon. 
It put in place verification measures that would essentially allow daily access to those facilities.  And it put in place inspections measures that would prevent Iran from developing a covert path.  It eliminated Iran’s stockpile of highly-enriched uranium.  It capped their stockpile of low-enriched uranium.  They have not added any additional enrichment facilities.  They have not installed any additional centrifuges since this deal went into place.  And we have the international community in place to verify that they’ve lived up to their terms of the agreement. 
The irony of this whole situation is that a year ago Prime Minister Netanyahu was calling this a historic mistake, but in his speech to Congress today he’s suggesting that this agreement should remain in place in perpetuity. 
The point is, Prime Minister Netanyahu and other critics of our approach to resolving the international community’s with Iran’s nuclear program have routinely, time and again, criticized agreements before they’d been struck, but then once they had been in place, frankly, touted their benefits.
So I guess my point is there will be an opportunity for people to evaluate for themselves the wisdom of the approach that the administration is taking on this.  And the truth is, our track record on this is quite strong. 
Q    One last question.  Is there any chance the President or Secretary Kerry would go back to the table and say, look, guys, look what I’ve got to deal with here, we’ve got to make this deal even stronger than the one I’ve already proposed?
MR. EARNEST:  The fact is the President is already driving a hard bargain at the table -- making sure that we’re going to shut down the four paths to a nuclear weapon that Iran has available to them, making sure that we’ve got, frankly, historically stringent inspection regimes in place to verify that Iran is living up to their end of the agreement. 
And so we’re already driving a very hard bargain here.  And we’re doing this, frankly, in concert with our international partners, and that only strengthens our hand.  The international unity around this is something that is starkly different than what was in place when the President took office.  An approach that just relied solely on sanctions with no real hope of negotiations, frankly, fractured the international community and allowed the Iranian regime to, frankly, unify the opinion inside that country.  But under this President’s leadership, we’ve actually reversed that scenario where the international community is united and we see a lot of cracks in the Iranian government about the wisdom of trying to develop a nuclear weapons program.
Q    So you’re saying there’s no need to revise the negotiating position of the American side at this point of the P5-plus-1?
MR. EARNEST:  Because it’s so strong.
George.
Q    Can I ask you to elaborate on one thing the President said in the Oval Office?  He said foreign policy runs through the executive branch, through the President.  Does he view the speech today as an effort by Congress to usurp his constitutional prerogatives?  Can you elaborate on that?
MR. EARNEST:  I think what’s clear is that Congress, in arranging this speech, tried to go around the executive branch.  This is why you had representatives from the Israeli Prime Minister’s office, or at least the Israeli government, working closely with representatives and the Speaker of the House without informing the executive branch.  And I’m certainly no constitutional scholar, but it is clear that in our founding documents that our Founding Fathers envisioned the President of the United States and the Commander-in-Chief as being the principal policymaker when it comes to foreign policy and for representing the interests of the United States overseas.
Now, it doesn’t mean there’s not a role for Congress, and I welcome a debate about the proper role for Congress, particularly when it comes to passing a right-sized authorization to use military force against ISIL.  So there is a role for Congress to play when it comes to foreign policy, but in this situation we saw congressional leaders -- Republican congressional leaders, I might add -- try to do an end run around the executive branch, and that was a departure from protocol.
Q    And by saying that today so pointedly, is he trying to send a message to them that he’s not going to stand for that?
MR. EARNEST:  No, I don’t think -- I think the President was responding to a direct question that he’d received from a journalist in the Oval Office, and it’s entirely consistent with the case that we’ve been making for weeks now that this represented a departure from protocol and certainly threatened to inject partisan politics in a relationship that has long benefitted from strong bipartisan support.
Ed.
Q    Despite that departure from protocol, didn’t you hear the Prime Minister show respect to the President by saying he’s done enormous things for Israel, things that are public, other things that are private that might be classified?  So why didn’t the President show the Prime Minister the respect of, A, watching the speech or, B, at least sending an official of some level -- any official -- to go?
MR. EARNEST:  Well, two reasons for that, Ed.  The first is, the President was not able to watch Prime Minister Netanyahu’s speech because he was preparing for and convened a meeting with our --
Q    But you added that right before the speech, right?
MR. EARNEST:  Well, this is a meeting that had been in the works for at least a couple of weeks, and it was an opportunity for the President to visit with his counterparts in Europe about the urgent situation in Ukraine.  So this was an important foreign policy priority as well, and something the President was preparing for and leading in the midst of Prime Minister Netanyahu’s speech.  But the President did show the Prime Minister the respect of reading his speech and both talking about it in public and even responding to a question about it.
Q    When the President said he heard no viable alternative from the Prime Minister, does that mean the President was expecting some sort of a plan for a deal with Iran or some other way to prevent Iran?  Did he want a plan?
MR. EARNEST:  Well, what the President had said is that the path that we are pursuing is the one that can most successfully address the international community’s concerns about Iran’s nuclear weapon.  If there are concerns about this plan, then it’s not fair to just sit on the sidelines and complain about a plan.  You are under some pressure and even an obligation, particularly if you consider this a priority, to present your own plan that you think would be better.  And we didn’t hear that.  And the President would make the case, as he did in the Oval Office, that there is not a better plan that exists.
Q    Except we don’t know what the plan is.  Isn’t it hypocritical to say, Mr. Prime Minister, lay out the details of a plan when you’re saying today, again, there is no deal.  And you’re worried about leaks and you don’t want any of the details to come out.  So the Prime Minister doesn’t know, the American people don’t know.  So how can you demand a plan from the Prime Minister when we don’t know what your plan is?
MR. EARNEST:  I see what you did there, Ed.  That’s what the kids do on the Internet.  (Laughter.) 
Q    You said you want a plan.  We don’t know your plan.
MR. EARNEST:  This is what’s clear -- is the President has a very clear strategy that he has laid out, a plan for resolving the international community’s concerns about Iran’s nuclear weapon.  And that is a plan that would extend the breakout period to 12 months, more than the two or three months that currently exist according to experts.
And what also would be part of that deal is a proposal to put in place historically stringent inspection measures to ensure that Iran is living up to their end of the bargain.  And that is, in the mind of the President, the best possible way for us to resolve the international community’s concerns with Iran’s nuclear program.  If there is anyone out there -- a Republican, a Democrat, a leader in the Israeli government -- who thinks that they have a better way for resolving the international community’s concerns about their nuclear program, then we’d like to see them put that plan forward.
What we know is that the military option does not do as much to resolve Iran’s -- the international community’s concerns with Iran’s nuclear program.  This is the best possible path, and it depends, however, on one thing.  It depends on Iran and their political leadership making some difficult decisions to agree to this plan.  And there is reason for them to not.  It is a tough deal.  It requires them to roll back key aspects of their nuclear program.  It requires them to abandon what we know, despite their protestations, has been an objective of at least some government leaders in Iran, which is to develop a nuclear weapon.  And we know it will require them to submit to the kind of inspections measures that they have previously resisted.
So it is a tough deal.  There is a reason why some people in Iran may say no.  But it would clearly be in the best interest of the international community if Iran says yes.
Q    A couple other quick topics.  On Hillary Clinton, in answer to Jon when you said at least once “according to them,” about Hillary Clinton’s people, according to them, these are all the emails -- are you acknowledging that this White House has made no effort and is making no effort to determine whether or not your Secretary of State broke the law?  You’re just laying it all on them?  Are you making any independent effort to find out if she broke the law?
MR. EARNEST:  Ed, it’s the responsibility of State Department officials to ensure that State Department employees are in compliance with the Federal Records Act.
Q    And you don’t hold them accountable?
MR. EARNEST:  And what those State Department officials have done is they’ve asked all of the previous-serving Secretaries of State to forward their personal email records that may pertain to official government business.  If they have personal email records that pertain to official government business, those are official government records and they should be properly maintained and preserved by the State Department.  That is exactly what Secretary Clinton’s team has done.
Q    A couple other quick questions on accountability as well.  This administration has been more aggressive than any other in trying to prosecute people for leaking classified information -- journalists who have either published or seen classified information working on stories -- and yet, General Petraeus, your Justice Department finds, leaked classified information.  And he gets off with a misdemeanor and is not doing any jail time.  What kind of signal does that send, that if you’re a senior member of the President’s administration, you leak classified information, you’re not going to jail but other people are?
MR. EARNEST:  Well, Ed, I don’t actually think that the Justice Department did find that he disclosed classified information.  The charge that he pled to was the improper handling of classified information.  That’s different than the disclosure.
Q    There was a black book of code words, spy names, the President’s briefings.  That’s not classified information? 
MR. EARNEST:  Ed, the charge that General Petraeus pled to was related to the improper handling of classified information.  That is different than the disclosure that you asserted.  For more details on that investigation, I would refer you to the Department of Justice.  But certainly the President believes that it was appropriate for General Petraeus to take responsibility for his actions.
Q    And last thing.  Yesterday, you had a question from Bloomberg about executive action on taxes.  And some people are interpreting this that you left the door open to the President raising taxes by executive action.  Is that possible?
MR. EARNEST:  Well, Ed, what I will leave open is always the President’s ability to use his executive authority to move the country in the right direction, to expand opportunity for the middle class -- 
Q    I didn’t asking you about moving the country forward or backward.  Would the President raise taxes by executive action?
MR. EARNEST:  Well, Ed, there are laws that are in place that deal with Congress and their power of the purse.  And it is Congress’s responsibility to make decisions about the budget.  It's why we have had such an extensive conversation about the Department of Homeland Security.  The President has put forward his own tax proposal for how he thinks we can work with Congress to close loopholes that only benefit wealthy and well-connected corporations, and use the revenue that’s generated to invest in the kind of infrastructure that will create jobs and strengthen our economy over the long term. 
We’ve been very clear about what those policies are.  But when it comes to specific steps the President may or may not take, I'm not going to rule anything in or out.  This is related to the President’s ability to use his executive authority to do what he thinks is the right thing for the country.  That, after all, is what the American people elected him to do.  And the fact is we haven’t seen a lot of efficient production out of Congress over the last couple of months.  Maybe, however, with the passage of funding for the Department of Homeland Security, maybe they’ve turned a corner.
Laura.
Q    I'm going to try in the French way because Hillary Clinton is really a world figure, as you may know.  Do you think Hillary Clinton did a mistake in the White House opinion?  I mean, is it -- did she do a mistake?
MR. EARNEST:  What Secretary Clinton and her team have done is they have complied with the guidelines of the Federal Records Act.  That is what the State Department agency is tasked with ensuring happens.  That is why they put in the request to Secretary Clinton and to the other Secretaries of State who have served in the email era.  These are Secretaries of State who served in both Democratic and Republican administrations.  They asked them to turn over records in their personal email accounts that may relate to the conduct of official U.S. business.  And they asked for those records so that they could be properly maintained and preserved at the Department of State. 
The Department of State would be responsible in the future, alongside the National Archives and Records Administration, to produce records in response to legitimate requests from Congress or from the public, or even, down the road, to historians that want to evaluate decisions that are made in this administration.
And that’s the way that these records should be properly handled.  That was the responsibility of Secretary Clinton’s team, and by their own reckoning here, they’ve handled the situation properly.
Q    I have another question on Ukraine. The President spoke today with President Hollande in a video teleconference.  What can you tell us about that?
MR. EARNEST:  The President did convene a secure video teleconference with his counterparts from France, Germany, Italy, the UK, and the European Council this morning in support of our continued efforts toward a negotiated solution to the conflict in Eastern Ukraine.  This, of course, follows a Normandy Group call among the leaders of France, Germany, Russia and Ukraine that took place yesterday.
You will also recall, at the end of last week the National Security Advisor Susan Rice convened a secure video teleconference with her counterparts in these European countries as well.  That was essentially the predicate for the meeting at the leader level. 
And it was an opportunity, in the context of that meeting, for the President to condemn the continuing failure of Russia and the separatists it backs to abide by the commitments to which they agreed, first in the Minsk agreements in September of last year and, more recently, in the Minsk Implementation Plan, including the attack on Debaltseve. 
I anticipate we’ll have a more detailed readout of that meeting a little later this afternoon.  This will be a readout that reflects the views of all six countries that participated in the teleconference, so it takes a little while for us to get the readout signed off on, but I anticipate we’ll have some more details this afternoon. 
Carol.
Q    I just wanted to clarify, did any senior official in the White House know that Secretary Clinton did not have an official email account? 
MR. EARNEST:  What I know is I know that the Secretary of State did trade emails with some White House officials. 
Q    So there were people in the White House who were aware of that?
MR. EARNEST:  They were aware of at least one email address that she was using.
Q    You can’t say whether or not anyone at the senior level in the White House knew that she solely was using a personal email account?
MR. EARNEST:  No.  And, frankly, I’d be surprised if anybody did.  But I don’t know the answer to that.  And the reason for that is that it's the responsibility of the State Department to maintain these email systems.  It’s important for people to understand that it’s not as if there is one email system that applies across the federal government.  Each agency is responsible for maintaining their own system.
Q    Does the White House have a view then on whether other Cabinet -- it’s okay for other Cabinet officials to not have an official government email account?
MR. EARNEST:  Well, the guidance that other Cabinet officials is similar to the guidance that officials all across the government have gotten, which is that they should use their official government account for official government business.
Q    But it’s different than not having a government account.  So does this White House think it’s okay for any other Cabinet official to not have a government account?
MR. EARNEST:  Well, again, we think that if people choose to conduct government business on email, that they should do so using their official government account.  I guess if you choose not to do any government business on email, I guess it would be fine for you to not have a government account.
The point is -- and this is the critical part, and this is what I think has attracted all of your attention -- is ensuring that official government records that exist in personal email accounts need to be properly maintained and preserved.  And they can do that by making sure that those emails are properly sent to the agency officials who are working with the National Archives and Records Administration to do exactly that.
Q    Okay.  So if you’re not clear on what exactly is happening in terms of how senior officials throughout the administration are handling their use of email, how does that reflect on this administration’s commitment to being the most transparent administration in history?
MR. EARNEST:  Well, Carol, what’s important is it’s important for everybody in the administration to abide by the guidelines that are laid out in the Federal Records Act.  And the President signed into law a bill at the end of last year that clarified exactly the guidelines and time frame under which individuals who have official government records in their personal email -- how they can ensure that those records are properly preserved and maintained in line with the standards that are set by the Federal Records Act. 
That is sort of at the core of it our chief concern, is making sure that these records are properly preserved, that they’re properly maintained, that they can be used in response to legitimate congressional oversight, that they can be used to respond to legitimate inquiries from the public, that they can even be used by historians in the future who are trying to get greater insight into decision-making inside the administration. 
So the proper preservation and maintenance of those records is what we’re after.  That is something that each agency is responsible for doing when it comes to records at their own agency.  They do this in conjunction and in partnership with the National Archives and Records Administration.  And, again, based on what we know about what Secretary Clinton’s team did that they succeeded in that effort in making sure that those records are properly preserved and maintained.  And we have some evidence to back that up in that hundreds of those records, we know, have been turned over to Congress in response to legitimate oversight from Congress.
Q    On Prime Minister Netanyahu, is there any concern within the White House that this is such a bilateral fight, meaning is there -- would the White House like some of the other leaders of the P5-plus-1 to back the President up on his view of taking on some of the criticism that the Prime Minister leveled today?
MR. EARNEST:  To be blunt about it, no.  The President feels very confident in the position that he has taken.  And it reflects the views of our negotiating partners in the P5-plus-1. It also reflects the view of the broader international community. The President also is confident -- and he’s been presented zero evidence to the contrary -- that the strategy that he is pursuing is the one that is best equipped to resolve the threat related to Iran’s nuclear program.
So the President is confident in this.  And the President, frankly, is looking forward to what he hopes will be an opportunity for the broader international community to evaluate the agreement that’s been reached between Iran and the international community.
But, ultimately, that’s going to require Iran to agree to some very tough things, both as it relates to rolling back key aspects of their nuclear program, but also as it relates to agreeing to the kind of monitoring requirements that they have previously chafed under.  So everybody will have an opportunity to evaluate the wisdom of this approach for themselves once a deal has been reached, if a deal has been reached.
Q    Would the President revise the deal if people don’t like the deal?
Q    In the speech itself, Nancy Pelosi called it an insult to the intelligence of the U.S. as part of the P5-plus-1 and suggested it was condescending.  Is she right?
MR. EARNEST:  Well, I didn’t have an opportunity to see her comments.  I know that she was planning to attend the speech today and she’s certainly entitled to her own opinion and her own reaction.
Q    Was it an insult to the intelligence of the U.S. as part of the P5-plus-1?
MR. EARNEST:  Well, I think you heard very clearly the President’s own reaction.  And the President’s view is that he’s not going to be distracted by the politics or the theater.  He’s going to be focused on our goal, which is eliminating the threat from Iran’s nuclear program.
Q    Another Democrat, Dianne Feinstein, called it a powerful speech, even though she agrees largely with the position that you all are taking.  Would you call it a powerful speech?  And if so, is there any concern about the impact that it might have on public opinion?
MR. EARNEST:  What the President is confident of is that once there is an opportunity for us to evaluate a deal, if a deal is reached, that the President will be able to make a very persuasive case about how lengthening the breakout period and putting in place very tough monitoring restrictions -- or very tough monitoring requirements -- that we can make a very good case that this is the best possible way for us to confront the threat from Iran’s nuclear program; that if we know that what’s happening in Iran’s nuclear program on a daily basis, and if we know that at a minimum it would take Iran a year to break out and build a nuclear weapon, that we have resolved the international community’s concerns with that program.  We’ve eliminated that threat.
Now, it would require vigilance.  It’s going to require the international community and our international inspectors to continue to carefully inspect Iran’s nuclear infrastructure.  We're going to have to be vigilant about making sure that Iran lives up to this deal.  But if we do, we know that Iran will not be able to acquire a nuclear weapon.  And that will prevent a nuclear arms race in the Middle East.  It will prevent Iran from being able to use that nuclear weapon to menace our strongest ally in the region, and it will strengthen the ability of the international community to deal with the volatility in the Middle East.
Q    So would a correct summary of the White House position on this speech be that you don't think it will have a negative impact -- negative from your perspective -- negative impact on either public opinion, on the ability of the President to sell the deal to Congress, or the negotiations themselves?
MR. EARNEST:  I think the easiest way to distill the reaction from the White House is that it doesn't change the President’s mind about the wisdom of the approach that he’s pursing.
Q    But it may change the mind of people who he needs to get this deal done.
MR. EARNEST:  And it should raise serious questions in the minds of people who doubt that pursuit because no alternative has been presented.  And until there is, there is no reason to think that the President isn’t right when he says that this strategy is the way that we can -- is the best possible way for us to resolve the international community’s concerns with their nuclear program.
Dave.
Q    Josh, thanks.  Since you came out to the podium there was a report from AP that a Justice Department investigation has found patterns of racial bias in the Ferguson Police Department. I assume the President knew this was coming.  Do you have a reaction from him yet?
MR. EARNEST:  I don't know that he necessarily was.  This is -- the Department of Justice has indicated that they’ve been investigating the Ferguson Police Department for some time now.  I don't know that he necessarily was aware of the results of that investigation prior to its completion and release.  And I haven’t seen the report that you're referring to, so I don't even know if it reflects a completed report, or just leaks about an investigation that's still underway.  So I’d be reluctant to comment on it from here.
Q    One more thing about Netanyahu’s speech.  Both you and the President have used the word “theater” to describe the speech, which implies entertainment value.  Is that really how the President looks at it?
MR. EARNEST:  Well, I had an opportunity to see some parts of the speech, and I know that there are others who noticed that there seemed to be some members of Congress who sort of seemed to be smiling and laughing and applauding along, which certainly doesn't seem to an appropriate response to a speech on such a significant topic.
Now, I noticed that the Prime Minister certainly didn't have that demeanor.  But I do think that that contributed to the more theatrical aspects of today’s event.
Ali.
Q    Josh, thanks.  Hi.
MR. EARNEST:  Nice to see you here.
Q    Good to see you, too.
MR. EARNEST:  I also read you recently got engaged.
Q    Thank you.  Yes, I did.
MR. EARNEST:  So best wishes to you.  (Applause.)   
Q    Thank you so much.  I wanted to ask -- I know this came up earlier very briefly about former CIA Director Petraeus’s pleading guilty to mishandling classified information.  I just wanted to know if the White House has a broader reaction to his plea today.
MR. EARNEST:  No, that's really it.  For more details about the investigation, I’d refer you to the Department of Justice.
All right, JC, I’ll give you the last one.
Q    I’ve been married for 23 years. 
MR. EARNEST:  There you go.  Congratulations to you and your wife.
Q    Thank you.  If I may change the topic to ISIL, something we haven’t talked about in a while.
MR. EARNEST:  Sure.
Q    About a week ago, the head of Egypt, President Sisi, recommended a, if you will, strong coalition of the willing Arab nations to combat ISIL in the region.  Was there any discussion today over that videoconference with the leaders -- these many leaders -- that that might be a good idea to join that coalition for really a universal coalition of the willing to fight ISIL?
MR. EARNEST:  I don't have a detailed readout of the teleconference, but we’ll have something later on this afternoon. I can just tell you as a general matter that the President is certainly very appreciative of the commitment that we’ve seen from members of the coalition to this effort to degrade and ultimately destroy ISIL.  And it’s taken a variety of forms, everything from trying to combat the movement of foreign fighters to countering the online activities of ISIL to radicalize citizens across the globe.  It’s included a comprehensive effort to shut down sources of funding for ISIL.  But it also has, of course, included a substantial commitment of military resources to fight ISIL. 
And we are counting on countries in the region to take some responsibility for fighting ISIL.  And whether that is training local fighters -- we know that there are some countries in the region that have committed to host training programs for members of the moderate Syrian opposition so that they can be trained and equipped by our coalition partners so that they can take the fight to ISIL on the ground in their own country.  And we certainly would welcome those kinds of contributions to this broader effort. 
Q    Thank you, Josh.
MR. EARNEST:  All right, thanks, everybody.
END

	3:19 P.M. EST
The White House
Office of the Press Secretary
James S. Brady Press Briefing Room 
1:05 P.M. EDT
MR. EARNEST:  Good afternoon, everybody.  I hope you all got to enjoy some uncharacteristically springtime weather in Washington this weekend.  I know I did.  I don't have anything else to get us started, so I'll go straight to your questions.  
Q    Thanks, Josh.  I want to get your response to the letter that Senate Republicans sent to Iranians leaders.  Does the President fear that this letter could threaten the talks at this very delicate stage?   
MR. EARNEST:  Well, Nedra, I would describe this letter as the continuation of a partisan strategy to undermine the President’s ability to conduct foreign policy and advance our national security interests around the globe.
The fact is the effort that is currently underway by the United States alongside our international partners seeks significant commitments from the Iranian government to curtail their nuclear program and make clear to the international community that their nuclear program exists exclusively for peaceful means.  And the international community, and certainly the President, is not prepared to take Iran’s word for it.  We're going to insist that the Iranians agree to intrusive inspection measures that will resolve the broader international community’s concerns.  And as the National Security Advisor put it, the approach of the international community is to distrust and verify that Iran’s is prepared to live up to the agreement. 
And the fact is we have heard Republicans now, for quite some time, including the principal author of this letter, make clear that their goal was to undermine these negotiations.  And, again, that is not something -- that is not a position I am ascribing to Senator Cotton.  That is a position that he has strongly advocated.  He described it as a feature of his strategy, not a bug. 
And the fact is that the President is trying to explore this diplomatic option with Iran alongside our international partners because it is in the best interests of the United States, for two reasons.  The first is the best way for us to resolve the international community’s concerns with Iran’s nuclear program is to get Iran’s own commitment to not develop a nuclear weapon and to verify that for the broader international community.  And the rush to war, or at least the rush to the military option that many Republicans are advocating is not at all in the best interests of the United States.
Q    Could this have the effect of advancing their goal of trying to thwart these talks?  Does it make it harder to reach a deal?
MR. EARNEST:  Well, it certainly interferes in that effort. The fact that there are ongoing negotiations with the United States, our P5-plus-1 partners that include our stalwart allies like Germany and France and the UK, but also include our partners like Russia and China, who are cooperating with us in this effort -- that to essentially throw sand in the gears here is not helpful and is not, frankly, the role that our Founding Fathers envisioned for Congress to play when it comes to foreign policy.
Q    Why shouldn’t a deal be considered a treaty that Congress should be able to weigh in on?
MR. EARNEST:  Well, Nedra, this is a useful discussion that what we are seeking from Iran are a whole set of commitments from them that are related to commitments to rein in the aspirations of their nuclear program and to submit -- commit to comply with an intrusive set of inspections to verify their compliance with the agreement.  What we are seeking, we're seeking commitments from the Iranian government.
This is not that different than the kind of commitments that we seek from other countries when we establish basing agreements with them.  So, currently, there are U.S. military personnel that are serving in places like Korea and Japan.  We have commitments from the Japanese government and the Korean government, for example, about what sort of rules and regulations will govern the U.S. military presence there.  That's an important agreement that has a substantial impact on the ability of our men and women in uniform to do their jobs and to do their jobs safely, but that is not an agreement that is subjected to congressional approval.   Those are specific commitments that, in that situation, Korea and Japan have made.
There are other examples.  The agreement that was put in place to eliminate Syria’s chemical weapons program was the United States and Russia working with Syria to get Syria to make some specific commitments about dismantling their chemical weapons program.  That is not an agreement that required congressional participation or approval, but it was a tangible set of commitments that were made by the Syrian government.  And the United States and Russia and a number of other countries in the international community worked with us to succeed in that effort.
Let me give you one other example.  There are also a variety of other multilateral agreements that relate to nonproliferation. So there are some direct similarities between this agreement that P5-plus-1 is currently negotiating with Iran and other agreements that ensure or prevent the proliferation of weapons, and in some cases, nuclear weapons.  The best example of this is that there is a multilateral agreement that is related to interdicting weapons in international waters, and we worked closely with the international community to prevent the shipment of illicit weapons shipments through international waters.  And we work with other countries to enforce those agreements and to secure commitments from other countries that they’re going to help us fight those efforts.
Again, that is a multilateral agreement that has significant consequences for American national security that doesn’t require congressional approval.  And this is the way that our Founding Fathers envisioned, that the executive branch would be responsible for protecting the foreign policy interests of the United States.
Q    One related question.  Many news organizations on Friday reported that Senator Menendez is about to face criminal charges.  And you had Senator Cruz suggesting that they would be political retribution from the White House for his opposition to the Iran talks.  Can you respond to that?
MR. EARNEST:  Well, I have seen those reports.  Those reports were not confirmed by the Justice Department, so we don’t know at this point exactly whether or not they’re true.  So I’m not going to comment on them, principally for that reason, because we don’t yet know whether this is true.
The other reason that I am loathe to comment on this is that there is a principle that this administration takes very seriously, which is ensuring that criminal prosecutions are kept separate and apart from any sort of political interference, even the appearance of political interference.  So that both explains why I’m not in a position to comment on this specific story, but it also serves to undermine the claims that are made by a number of people, including apparently Senator Cruz.
Julia.
Q    Thanks.  So President Obama is meeting with European Council President Tusk today, and Tusk has indicated that Europe is not ready to tighten sanctions on Russia.  Is the U.S. prepared to go it alone should it beef up sanctions on Russia and take other measures?  And are you waiting to see what happens with the current cease-fire in Ukraine?
MR. EARNEST:  The President is pleased to have the opportunity to be visiting with President Tusk today here at the White House.  It is an opportunity for us to discuss a range of issues, including the coordinated international effort to confront Russia over the situation in Ukraine.  They’ll also have an opportunity to talk about the Transatlantic Trade and Investment Partnership.  They’ll also talk about things like energy security and climate change, and even the situation in Libya.  So they have a pretty long agenda.
I would anticipate that they’ll have a discussion about the ongoing strategy with respect to Russia in Ukraine.  I don’t have any additional announcements to make at this point about sanctions that may be contemplated on the part of the United States.  Obviously we have continued to watch the sort of uneven implementation of the Minsk Implementation Plan. 
There had been reports that heavy weapons have been withdrawn, but we continue to be concerned about Russia and the behavior of the separatists that they back.  Most specifically, Russia and those separatists have prevented OSCE monitors from getting full access to contested areas to verify compliance with the Minsk Implementation Plan.  That continues to be the subject of significant concern.  And it represents a failure of Russia and the separatists they back to live up to the terms of the agreement.  So we continue to have concerns about that.  And as long as Russia and the separatists that they back continue to engage in that kind of behavior, they’re only increasing the likelihood that they could face additional isolation and have additional costs imposed on them by the international community.
We have sought from the beginning to work closely in coordination with our European partners to ratchet up that pressure.  And we’re going to continue to coordinate those efforts in the days ahead.
Q    Okay.  Also, the CBO just made another downward revision to the estimates of insurance costs under Obamacare.  Is the White House -- does it see this as the Supreme Court weighs in on making a decision -- that it could bring down the curtain on Obamacare?
MR. EARNEST:  Well, it certainly is a -- only the latest in a long line of data points that indicate the Affordable Care Act is contributing in a very positive way to holding down the growth of health care costs in this country in a way that has very real economic benefits, not just for middle-class families across the country but also for businesses large and small.
And one of the goals here has been to recognize that the unrestrained growth in health care costs did pose a threat to governments -- our government’s finances, but also did contribute to some weakness in our economy, and that over the long term, getting a handle on those trends is important and was one of the goals of the Affordable Care Act.  And we’re pleased to see that even just after a couple of years of being in effect, that the impact is both noticeable and positive.
Michelle. 
Q    On this letter, now there’s some reaction coming from Democratic senators and others calling the Iran letter “cynical, brazen,” that it weakens America’s hand, that it could sabotage things.  I mean, they’re using pretty strong terms, and you just said that it “interferes.”  Does it put the U.S. in a weaker position for negotiating?  Could this letter hurt that process?

	MR. EARNEST:  Well, Michelle, as I mentioned I think at the very top, this is only the latest in an ongoing partisan strategy to undermine the President’s ability to conduct foreign policy and to advance our national security interests around the globe.  I do think that it does that.
And I think the other thing that is notable here is when you have a letter that is signed by 47 senators of the same party being sent to the leader of another country, it raises I think some legitimate questions about the intent of those who signed the letter.
Q    So you’re saying that it could harm the negotiations?  I just want to be clear. 
MR. EARNEST:  Well, again, I think the fact that there are ongoing diplomatic conversations -- again, not just between the United States and Iran, but between the United States and our P5-plus-1 partners that includes our allies like Germany and France and the UK, but also includes our partners like Russia and China.  These are nations with whom we have some significant disagreement but who, in this case, are working closely with the United States because they agree that there are significant benefits associated with reaching a diplomatic agreement here. 
And it’s surprising to me that there are some Republican senators who are seeking to establish a back channel with the hardliners in Iran to undermine an agreement between Iran and the broader international community.
Q    So it does threaten the negotiations, in summary?
MR. EARNEST:  Well, I think I’ve said this as -- probably as many ways as I can at this point. 
Q    I’m still not sure.  But you’re saying that what you said stands, or are you saying that it could threaten the negotiations?
MR. EARNEST:  You keep using the same words.  I’ve used lots of different words.  Use one of mine to describe -- (laughter.)
Q    Okay.  And also, over the weekend -- so you’re also talking about how much you’re asking for from Iran on all of these commitments, but then again over the weekend, we heard the President say in an interview that the agreement would be extraordinarily reasonable for Iran.  Can you sort of give us some balance there?
MR. EARNEST:  Yes, the context that the President was making is if you assume that when Iran says their nuclear program exists solely for peaceful purposes, that should be an easy thing for them to demonstrate.
Now, there are all sorts of reasons why we doubt those previous claims.  But the point of the President is that as Iran is evaluating this agreement, if they’re willing to live up to their commitment to have their nuclear program exist for only peaceful purposes, then that should be a relatively easy thing to demonstrate.  Now, they’re going to have to demonstrate it.  They’re going to have to agree to a set of very intrusive inspections, principally because in the past they have explored some covert strategies for developing a nuclear weapon.
But again, if your frame of reference is Iran’s commitment to a peaceful nuclear program, there should be a reasonable way for them to demonstrate that.  And that is the point that the President was making.  The concern that the President and the international community has is that Iran’s behavior in the recent past has not been consistent with their promises of a peaceful nuclear program, which is precisely why any sort of agreement that is reached will require serious commitments on the part of Iran to an intrusive inspections program that allows international inspectors not just into their nuclear facilities, but also into the manufacturing facilities that are manufacturing parts and equipment for their nuclear facilities that would require inspections at uranium mines in Iran to ensure that we have a lot of insight into their program, essentially to prevent them from being in a position of establishing another covert strategy for developing a nuclear weapon.
And again -- I guess the last point is, all of this is much more likely to be successful and more enduring than the military option that our Republican opponents seem to be advocating.
Q    Just when you said it was extraordinarily reasonable, is the extraordinary part, is that in the timeframe given or the fact that they’re able to continue with their nuclear program for peaceful means?  Is that what would be extraordinary about the reasonableness of the negotiation?
MR. EARNEST:  Well, I think the point that the President made in the course of that interview is to demonstrate that if Iran is interested in a genuinely peaceful nuclear program, that that is something that they should be able to both agree to, but also agree to prove to the international community, that that essentially should be something that’s easy for them to demonstrate and therefore should be something that they would agree to. 
Now, the fact of the matter is, this is not something that Iran has been honest about in the past, and that is part of why this is such an important strategy for resolving the international community’s concerns with their nuclear program.  And military option is one that would be less effective, principally because it would not be as enduring in terms of the impact that it would have, but also if a military option were deployed, it’s not hard to imagine that Iran would say, we’re not going to agree to these inspections any longer.  And that means the international community would only have less insight into what’s happening with Iran’s nuclear program.
That’s why a negotiated diplomatic solution is one that doesn’t require the kind of military commitment that some of our opponents seem to be advocating.  It does ensure greater transparency into Iran’s nuclear program.  And it’s one that’s likely to last longer.  A military option would set back their program, but for only a fraction of the time than the length of the diplomatic agreement that’s currently being negotiated.
Q    Okay.  And lastly, on Iraq, over the weekend we also heard officials practically begging the coalition to help protect antiquities, and asking why, if the coalition can target an individual tank or an individual building, why they couldn’t do more to protect Nimrud, as ISIS was practically bulldozing the place.  Is this something that concerns the President, concerns the administration, why those couldn’t be protected?
MR. EARNEST:  Well, I guess for the kinds of tactical decisions that are being made as it relates to the use of military airpower, I’d refer you to the Department of Defense.  They’re the ones that are in a position to decide how those resources should be properly allocated.
Olivier.
Q    A couple for you.  You listed a number of international commitments that do not go to a vote in Congress.  Can I just be clear?  Do you regard the corporate legislation as unnecessary or actually undesirable?
MR. EARNEST:  I guess what I would say is that the kind of commitments that we are seeking to extract from the Iranians, alongside our international partners, is not one that falls in the realm of requiring congressional approval on the frontend. 
Now, what is important about this -- and this is another aspect of our position that is routinely distorted by our opponents -- the administration has long worked closely with Congress in this effort.  You’ll recall that several years ago, when Congress put in place tough sanctions against Iran that the administration worked with them as they did that.  The President signed that bill into law.  And the President his team then implemented a diplomatic strategy to maximize the impact of the sanctions that Congress had passed.
So you did see effective coordination and cooperation between the administration and Congress in that effort.  Since then, you have seen the administration go to great lengths to work closely with Congress to keep them in the loop on the status of ongoing negotiations.  That’s taken place in a variety of settings.  The President of the United States, for goodness sakes, has even had senior members of Congress here to talk to them about those conversations directly.
And we have always envisioned a role for Congress at some point in terms of essentially taking the sanctions away once we have seen demonstrated compliance on the part of Iran to the agreement.  And I think this is in some ways where the difference is.  Congress is insisting, well, that they should have a vote on the sanctions regime and on the deal shortly after an agreement is reached at the negotiating table, but that’s not what the President envisions.  The fact is the President does not envision substantial sanctions relief for Iran right at the negotiating table.  We want to see a demonstrated commitment on Iran’s part to living up to the agreement before we contemplate offering relief from the statutory sanctions regimes that Congress has put in place. 
And I’m not just talking about over the course of weeks or months; I’m talking about years.  We would want to see Iran demonstrate its commitment to this agreement for years before we’d envision a scenario where Congress would take away the sanctions that were so important to getting Iran to the negotiating table in the first place.
So there is a robust and important role for Congress to play.  There has been in the past; there is right now; and there will be in the future.  But what Congress should not do -- and, frankly, what Republicans in Congress should not do, is continue to pursue a partisan strategy to undermine the talks before a deal has even been reached.
Q    Okay.  And then you accused Republicans in Congress of trying to create a back channel to hardliners in Iran. 
MR. EARNEST:  Kind of ironic, isn’t it?
Q    Well, it’s kind of weird because it’s an open letter to the leadership of Iran.  I mean, unless you have evidence of a secret effort to enlist these folks behind -- that’s what a back channel.  It’s not a press release that’s labeled “To the leaders of Iran.” 
MR. EARNEST:  Well, I guess the reason that I call it -- maybe it’s a direct channel.  I’m not as familiar with the diplomatic-speak as you might be.  (Laughter.)  But it is a little ironic that -- well, and I don’t mean that as a criticism, it just reflects -- (laughter) -- your experience is different than mine.
The point is what we have seen is we have seen a bunch of Republicans in Congress, at least some of whom have previously criticized the President for engaging with Iran in the first place, now writing a letter to the leadership of Iran suggesting that they should withdraw or at least not participate in talks with the broader international community about their nuclear program.
This is why I think it raises significant questions about the intent or the aims of the letter’s authors, because it does undermine the President’s ability to represent our foreign policy interests around the globe and advance our national security interests, and it does raise questions about what their strategy actually is. 
If they’re trying to undermine this agreement and not allow a diplomatic resolution to be arrived at, then they should just be -- A, they should be honest about that.  The letter is couched in all these terms about trying to provide a civics lesson to Iran’s political leadership.  But the fact is they’re against a deal.  If they’re so ashamed of that position, why wouldn’t they advocate it publicly?  And if they do advocate that a diplomatic agreement is not the right approach, then they should explain what the right approach is. 
The fact is the only other alternative that anybody else has put on the table is a military option.  And the fact is this Republican track record of putting military options ahead of diplomatic options has a long and rather sordid history.
Mara.
Q    Does the letter send a message to Iran that no matter what they do, sanctions aren’t going to be lifted by this Congress?
MR. EARNEST:  Well, again, the letter -- I don’t know if I brought out the letter.  I guess I did.  I think the message they’re delivering is one, as Olivier pointed out, is an open letter.  So I guess you can ask them about the message they’re trying to send.  I can talk to you about the impact that it’s going to have.
Q    Well, you’re saying Congress isn’t necessary to approve a deal.  But you did say they are necessary to lift the sanctions.
MR. EARNEST:  Yes, yes.  But that is a scenario that we would envision only after years of demonstrated compliance with the agreement.  The President does not believe it’s a good idea right after reaching the deal with Iran -- particularly given their history of non-compliance with international standards, that it doesn’t make a lot of sense to take away right away essentially the toughest weapon that we’ve used so far; that by putting in place these statutory sanctions that Congress passed several years ago, we did succeed in putting enormous pressure on the Iranian economy.  Now, a lot of that, again, is thanks to the good work of this administration that worked with the international community to maximize the impact of those sanctions.
But we saw that oil exports plummeted in Iran, that Iran’s currency was significantly devalued, that there’s a whole host of negative economic impacts that they have sustained as a result of this international isolation.  And in the mind of the President, we should make sure that Iran is serious about living up to the terms of this agreement over a number of years before we contemplate taking those sanctions away.
Q    So you’re saying no sanction relief for many, many years?
MR. EARNEST:  What I’m suggesting is that we should not take down, we should not dismantle our sanctions architecture until Iran has, over the course of a number of years, demonstrated a willingness to comply with an international agreement.
Justin.
Q    We’ve got about 20 minutes so I want to go back to your favorite topic from last week, which is Secretary Clinton’s emails.
MR. EARNEST:  Great.  (Laughter.)
Q    We heard from the President in his interview with CBS about this and he said that he first became aware of it in the reports last week.  So I’m wondering if, implicit in that, is that the President and Secretary Clinton never emailed one another when Secretary Clinton was serving at the State Department.
MR. EARNEST:  That may be one conclusion to draw from the President’s remarks, but it would not be an accurate one.  The President, as I think many people expected, did over the course of his first several years in office trade emails with his Secretary of State.  I would not describe the number of emails as large, but they did have the occasion to email one another.  And the point that the President was making is not that he didn’t know Secretary Clinton’s email address -- he did -- but he was not aware of the details of how that email address and that server had been set up or how Secretary Clinton and her team were planning to comply with the Federal Records Act.
Q    Just to drill down on that a little bit, does that mean that he didn’t know that he was emailing whatever it was, like, 
HRC@Clintonemail.com
, or that --
MR. EARNEST:  Well, again, I’m not going to get into a lot of detail here, but I’m not going to -- the point is the President did email with Secretary Clinton.  I assume that he recognized the email address that he was emailing back to.  But, again, the question here is about compliance with the Federal Records Act.  And understandably, the kinds of things that a President and his Secretary of State talk about are pretty weighty, national issues.  I’m not sure that they drilled all the way down to the Federal Records Act. 
But what is clear is that, as the President said in his interview, the emails that he sends are properly maintained, consistent with the Presidential Records Act -- and that, by the way, would be true of any emails that he received from his Secretary of State.  And the reason I raise that is because Secretary Clinton’s team has pointed out, rightfully so, that a large number of the emails that they provided to the State Department in response to a request from her personal email system were already maintained on the State Department agency system.  And the reason for that is she was emailing people with -- State Department employees with state.gov email addresses, which meant that those email communications had been properly preserved and maintained.
The last thing I’ll say about this is that what we know also is that the whole purpose of maintaining these records is to ensure that they can be properly used in responding to legitimate questions and inquiries from Congress and from the public.  And I understand that hundreds of documents have already been provided to Congress consistent with their specific request out of these records.
Q    Well, that’s actually what I wanted to ask you about.  Trey Gowdy, I think also on CBS this weekend, said that in their request for emails and documents from the State Department that there were big holes in the Secretary’s emails that were turned over.  He cited specifically there’s the famous photo of Hillary on her Blackberry flying to Libya and that there was -- no emails turned over not only from that day but that trip entirely.  So if those emails haven’t been produced by the State Department, does that suggest that Secretary Clinton has not turned over all the emails that she should have?  And if the principal investigator from Congress is saying that there are holes that exist in the record, is that something that you guys at the White House now need to step in and say, what’s going on here, let’s investigate this, the State Department doesn’t seem to be doing their job?
MR. EARNEST:  Well, I’m not sure that there’s -- I think that last part might be one step too far.  It is the responsibility of the State Department to respond to legitimate requests from congressional committees.  And the State Department has cooperated at great length with the eight different congressional committees that have been formed to investigate this situation.
Q    But Secretary Clinton just turned over her emails --
MR. EARNEST:  But my point is, is that if you or Chairman Gowdy have specific questions about specific emails that should be produced in response to a legitimate congressional inquiry, then he should raise that directly with State Department officials.  In fact, I would hazard a guess that if the White House were intimately involved in that kind of effort to review email and make determinations about what should be provided to Congress, that he’d be complaining about that on national television as well.
So there is a process that’s involved and the point is there is a strong track record of the State Department working closely with legitimate and even some illegitimate congressional inquiries into this particular matter.  And so if he has questions or concerns about that, as the eighth chairman of a committee to review this matter, then he should take that up directly with the State Department.  And this administration will continue to be guided by a principle that we will work cooperatively with legitimate congressional inquiries.
Ed.
Q    Josh, what is the timeline on when the White House Counsel’s office found out that Secretary Clinton had her own server at home?
MR. EARNEST:  Ed, I don't know the answer to that question. What I can tell you is that it is the responsibility of individual agencies to establish an email system and to make sure that those emails as they’re created are properly archived and maintained both so they can be used to respond to legitimate public inquiries and to legitimate congressional inquiries.  And that's the responsibility of those agencies to do that. 
It is the agency at the State Department that specifically made the request to Secretary Clinton and her team to provide the emails on her personal email system that relate to her official government responsibilities.
Q    And when did the White House learn that not only that she had this other account or accounts but that she had not turned them over to the previous committees?  Was it when Trey Gowdy sent a subpoena or requested these documents?  Is that the timeline?
MR. EARNEST:  Well, Ed, again, I don't know the answer to that specific question.  Again, what I can tell you is it is the responsibility of the agencies to maintain these kinds of records and it's the responsibility of agencies to administer the emails.
Q    But at some point, isn't it at some point the responsibility of the White House to make sure their Secretary of State is complying with at least rules if not the law?
MR. EARNEST:  And that is why the State Department made a specific request of Secretary Clinton and all of the previous Secretaries of State to ask them to turn over their emails on their personal email that may relate to the conduct of official U.S. government business.  And that is to ensure compliance with the Federal Records Act.  And if Secretary Clinton’s team did as they said they did -- and nobody has raised in my mind at least any legitimate reason to doubt that they’ve done anything other than what they said they did -- then Secretary Clinton is in compliance with the Federal Records Act.
Q    And on that point, the Wall Street Journal quoting an administration official this morning as saying of the Clinton camp, “If they screwed up on the emails, if we found out they skipped over her emails, then that will be a problem for them.  It will be a scandal, but it's not one that we'll own.”  Is there some separation going on here between the White House and the Clinton camp?
MR. EARNEST:  Well, Ed, I think that quote refers to a specific fact, which is that it's Secretary Clinton’s team that obviously has access to her personal email server and it's their responsibility to respond to the State Department request to turn over emails that were related to her official government business.  Now, again, they say that they’ve done that and I don't see any reason to doubt that they have done exactly what they said they would do.  But ultimately, that is the responsibility of Secretary Clinton and her team.
Q    A couple other quick topics.  On Senator Menendez, when you were saying the key here is to make sure the investigations are not politicized -- and this administration, as you know, has been very aggressive about investigating press leaks and what not.  Are you launching some sort of investigation here to figure out why someone at the Justice Department leaked the idea that a Democratic senator is about to face criminal charges?
MR. EARNEST:  Well, Ed, I can't speak to the accuracy of those claims, so I don't know --
Q    They were published pretty widely.  Someone at the Justice Department was quoted --
MR. EARNEST:  That's not proof of them being a fact.  So --
Q    -- so misrepresented then and nobody at Justice talked to the media?
MR. EARNEST:  I think the point here is, Ed, that I am not aware of anything like that because I shouldn’t be; that if there’s a criminal investigation underway, it is one that has been done wholly separate and apart from any sort of political interference.  That's why I'm not in a position to comment on whether or not they’re true or not.  I don't know.  Nor should I. And I think that's the point. 
Q    You're suggesting you don't know -- is there a firewall between the Justice Department and the White House on the Menendez investigation?  Has the President been briefed on the potential charges --
MR. EARNEST:  Again, Ed --
Q    No, just a simple question.  Has anyone in the White House --
MR. EARNEST:  I'm making a simple point.  I don't know if there’s a Menendez investigation.  You're referring to it as if it's a fact, and I'm not in a position to comment on it because I'm not --
Q    Nobody at the White House has been briefed at the White House because you're not even aware that there’s an investigation, is that right?
MR. EARNEST:  I'm not aware that there’s an investigation.  Ed, the point is, is that we work very hard and diligently, as has previous administrations, to ensure for the integrity of these criminal investigations to move forward that there is not any political interference. 
Q    Okay.  And the last thing, on Iran.  You kept talking about sanctions and what the Republicans want is war, and in just reading Tom Cotton’s letter, I don't see the word, “sanctions,” I don't see the word, “war.”  I understand that that may be the way you're framing it, that they’re pushing some alternative to go to war instead of a deal.  But the letter actually goes into great detail about how what these Republicans at least claim that they want is they want a vote in Congress on the deal.  So my question to you is:  What’s wrong with a little sunshine?  What’s wrong with saying we're going to negotiate a wonderful deal here, and we're willing to let Democrats and Republicans vote on that?  That appears to be -- if you read their words, and I get you're going to read other motives and all this -- the letter is saying we want an up or down vote in Congress, something Bob Menendez, a Democrat we just talked about, he’s wanted.  Other Democrats have talked about it.

	 

	MR. EARNEST:  He didn't sign this letter.
Q    He didn't sign this letter because Republicans did this.  My question is what’s wrong with an up or down vote?  They're not saying they don't want a deal.  They're saying they want a deal that is going to survive an up or down vote on the Hill.  That's different from what you're --
MR. EARNEST:  Senator Cotton has referred to his strategy to undermine this deal as an effort to prevent a diplomatic agreement.  He described that as a feature of this strategy, not a bug.  I think he said it on camera, and so it is clear what their strategy is. 
And again, if they want to mask it as part of some sort of civics lesson that they want to share with Iran’s political leadership, they're welcome to do that.  It might evince some reluctance or at least hesitation about the wisdom of their strategy -- or at least the wisdom of their ultimate goal here.  And I think the reason for that is simple, Ed, because the only option to a diplomatic agreement that anybody else has raised is a military option.  And again, we have seen Republicans time and again try to advance the military option ahead of a diplomatic option.  And the President doesn't think that that's good policy. He certainly doesn't think it’s good strategy.  And the truth is the efforts of neocons in the previous administration to do that, frankly, hurt the country’s standing around the world.
Jon.
Q    Josh, first on the letter, the letter says, the next President could revoke such an agreement with the stroke of a pen and future Congresses can modify the terms of the agreement at any time.  I’m just wondering is that an accurate statement.  Couldn’t the next President, if this is not a ratified treaty, if this is simply an agreement that the President has struck with the leadership of Iran and our allies, that a future President can say, we're opting out?
MR. EARNEST:  Well, Jon, I will tell you that one of the things that's contributed to the United States’ diplomatic influence around the globe is this notion of continuity, that when other countries are doing business with the leader of the United States, they understand that they're not just doing that business with one President, they're doing it with the country.
And for example, on the campaign trail in 2008, there was no doubt about the fact that there was a substantial difference of opinion between President Bush and President Obama for confronting a wide variety of foreign policy challenges.  And this President didn't walk into office and with the stroke of a pen undo a whole long series of agreements that President Bush had reached with other countries.  That would have been irresponsible. 
And in fact, you’ll recall that the debate throughout the 2008 campaign was about a responsible drawdown of U.S. troops from Iraq.  And the fact is people around the globe understand that when they are doing business with the American President, they’re doing business with the United States of America and not just that one person.
Q    But isn’t it true -- that history taken into consideration -- isn’t it true that the next President of the United States can undo this agreement with a stroke of a pen if it is not ratified by Congress?  It may look bad, it may be something you think breaks with precedent, but would there be anything legally that would stop the next President from undoing that agreement first day in office?
MR. EARNEST:  If a President is focused on the best interest of the United States of America and focused on the assessment of whether or not Iran is living up to the terms of the agreement, and if the international community has confirmed that they are, it would clearly not be in the best interest of the United States.  And it is hard to envision a President taking an unprecedented step that only weakens the United States on his or her first day in office.
Q    Okay.  Back to the question of the emails.  Given your back-and-forth on this question of what Mrs. Clinton has turned over, doesn’t it make sense to have an independent arbiter look at her server and determine which emails were official business and therefore, under the Records Act, should be turned over to Archives?  I mean, doesn’t it make sense that there should be a third party, an independent party to make that determination?
MR. EARNEST:  Well, ultimately -- as I mentioned before Secretary Clinton’s team has said that they have reviewed all these emails and they’ve turned over 55,000 of them to the State Department --
Q    So we’re supposed to just take their word for it?
MR. EARNEST:  A large number of them already existed on the State Department system.  And I haven’t heard anybody or seen anybody present any evidence to indicate that they didn’t do what they said that they did.
So again, if they decide -- if Secretary Clinton’s team decides that they want to go to even greater lengths than they already have, then that’s ultimately a decision for them to make. They’re the ones that are in charge of the email server.  But ultimately this administration is --
Q    So you would not have a problem, the White House would not have a problem with a third party taking a look at her server and determining with emails were official correspondence?
MR. EARNEST:  Well, again, ultimately, this is a decision that is going to be left up to Secretary Clinton’s team to make on this.  But again, what we know is --
Q    I understand.  There is -- you’re saying it’s their decision to make, but you would have no objection to a third party looking at her server if that’s what they decided to do to reassure everybody that she was completely above board?  The White House would have no problem if a third party were to look at her server and determine which of her emails are official business and therefore should be turned over.
MR. EARNEST:  Again, I’d be surprised that that would be required, however, because no one has been in a position to provide any evidence to indicate that they haven't actually done --
Q    You’d be surprised that would be required?  You’d be surprised that people wouldn’t want to take her word for it, like it’s an honor system, whatever she determines is official business?
MR. EARNEST:  Jon, what’s clear is that they have turned over thousands of records to the State Department.  The State Department has properly archived and maintained them.  They’ve already used them in response to questions that have been submitted by Congress.  And no one, at any point, has suggested that Secretary Clinton’s team didn’t turn over the emails that they were supposed to turn over, the ones that were related to the conduct of official business.
Q    Would it be strange for her to not have any emails from a trip she took to the region, where she’s photographed on her Blackberry?
MR. EARNEST:  Again, I can’t speak to any emails that she may have sent on this.  Maybe she was using her Blackberry to read the news.  You can use your Blackberry for other things other than email, right?
Q    And on the --
MR. EARNEST:  Or tweeting, in fact.  I think that’s the whole joke, right, about the whole thing?  Is that she was --
Q    A text.  It was text.
MR. EARNEST:  Oh, a text from Hillary, not tweets from Hillary.
Q    Maybe we can get into a whole other thing about her texts.
MR. EARNEST:  Let’s not.  (Laughter.) 
Q    On the question of the President, the President was asked a very direct question by Bill Plante:  If he was aware that she was using non-government email to conduct official business.  And his answer was, he was not aware of that until he read the news, or heard about it in the news reports.  How is that possible?  Because you’ve just told us he received emails from her.  I mean, by definition, wouldn’t any email going from the Secretary of State to the President of the United States be official business?
MR. EARNEST:  Well, presumably.  Although --
Q    I mean, it could have been a birthday hello, but I would think just about anything between those two is business.
MR. EARNEST:  Yes, I tried to -- in response to somebody’s question earlier -- I think it was Justin who brought this up the first time -- that the President was referring specifically to the arrangement associated with Secretary Clinton’s email.  Yes, the President was aware of her email address; he traded emails with her.  That shouldn’t be a surprise that the President of the United States is going to trade emails with the Secretary of State.  But the President was not aware of the fact that this was a personal email server, and that this was the email address that she was using exclusively for --
Q    All her business.
MR. EARNEST:  -- for all her business.  The President was not aware of that until that had been more widely reported. 
But again, the President’s commitment to the guidance that we’ve offered to employees of the government to use official email for official business is one that is important and one that he himself follows.
Q    Would the President, if he had been aware, suggested to Mrs. Clinton, Secretary Clinton, that she should be using official emails, since that was the guidance?
MR. EARNEST:  That’s a hard hypothetical to speculate upon.
Richard.
Q    Thank you, Josh.  A couple questions on the fight against ISIL.  Last Friday, a Canadian soldier with Special Operations was killed in a friendly-fire incident.  I was just wondering, first, how you see this -- when we talk about a coordinated effort and strategy to fight ISIL, how come such incident happened?
MR. EARNEST:  Richard, let me start by saying that the United States extends its deepest condolences on the loss of Canadian Armed Forces Sergeant Andrew Joseph Doiron, who was tragically killed in Iraq on Saturday during a friendly-fire incident.  We offer our sympathies to the people of Canada and to the family and loved ones of Sergeant Doiron.  Our thoughts are also with the three injured members of the Canadian Armed Forces as we wish them a speedy recovery. 
The United States and more than 60 coalition partners proudly stand with Canada and recognize the extraordinary contributions and sacrifices of the Canadian Armed Forces and of all the men and women serving the coalition campaign to degrade and ultimately destroy ISIL.
Obviously, as we have said and as you have heard me observe on a number of occasions, that Iraq is a very dangerous place right now, and that is the reason that we’ve seen the international community respond under the leadership of this President to try to support Iraqi forces on the ground, Kurdish security forces on the ground, as they try to roll back the gains that are made by ISIL.  And it’s very dangerous work, and it is why we are so grateful of the contribution not just of the Canadian people and the Canadian military but of the military resources that have come from coalition countries all around the globe.
Q    Part of the controversy, Josh -- and in Canada they are studying the possibility of renewing the mandate of the soldiers over there -- is that the Canadian soldiers are doing airstrikes targeting on the ground.  And the perception is they’re doing this, the Americans are not on the ground doing it, taking big risks that the Americans are not taking to make sure that these types of missions are prolonged, when will we see American soldiers doing this type of airstrike targeting?
MR. EARNEST:  Well, this is a question that was raised last fall for the Chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff, and so in some ways he’s probably in the best position to answer this question.  I think that American military personnel will start engaging in that kind of activity once the Chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff deems it necessary and makes such a recommendation to the United States that the President then agrees with and approves.  And that’s the process that we have established for this.  This is an option that, as Chairman Dempsey has said in the past, is on the table. 
My rough understanding, though, of the circumstances of the tragic incident that occurred over the weekend, though, is that it was not related to this issue of calling in airstrikes; that it was in a different engagement in which this tragedy occurred.
April.
Q    Josh, I want to follow up on the ISIL issue.  Boko Haram has pledged loyalty to ISIS.  What is the White House saying about that as they’re still dealing with Boko Haram in Africa, particularly in Nigeria?
MR. EARNEST:  Well, April, we have seen reports of a Twitter message and a corresponding video, purportedly from Boko Haram’s leadership, pledging allegiance to ISIL.  The intelligence community has no reason to doubt that these claims were issued by Boko Haram’s leader, and may be designed at least in part for propaganda value.  Boko Haram, which has previously expressed solidarity with both AQIM and al Qaeda core, and ISIL have demonstrated similar acts of wanton brutality, and we take any potential links between these two groups as a matter of concern.  The intelligence community will remain focused on potential indications of deepening ties. 
The part of this that I would commend to your attention is the note that Boko Haram has previously sought to align themselves with other prominent terrorist organizations.  And it might lead one, at least, to conclude that Boko Haram is primarily interested in the propaganda value of such an announcement.  And at this point, it’s difficult to determine what sort of operational value it may have, but it’s one that I’m confident the international community will be closely monitoring.
Q    On another subject, and I hate to do this, but back on the emails -- when you talk about the President’s email, I’m sure there are security features and filters and things of that nature, but when he emails, I’m sure there -- or you tell me if I right or wrong -- you have to plug in a name or email so that the computer -- his email system recognizes that person.  You can't just send any kind of email to that system, meaning that it would recognize her .Gov email account.  Was it I guess programmed to accept that other server email as well?
MR. EARNEST:  At this point, April, I’m not going to get into a detailed -- well, let me say it this way.  One of the security precautions we take around the President’s emails is we don't talk about it very much publicly.  And --
Q    You were getting ready to talk about it.  (Laughter.)
MR. EARNEST:  Well, safety first.  But what I can tell you is that the President and the Secretary of State did exchange emails while she was serving as Secretary of State.  And in accordance with the guidelines that we follow here at the White House, that email was -- those exchanges were preserved pursuant to the Federal Records Act. 
And the other point that I would make on all of this, particularly as it relates to the President’s email, is that he himself has a keen awareness of how valuable, when it comes to scholarly work, that this email could be in the future; that previous Presidents have not used email nearly as much as he has.  And he understands that there is legitimate scholarly value in having insight into those conversations that the President has over email with Cabinet officials and with other senior members of his administration.
So he certainly understands personally why this is important.  Over the weekend, the President had the opportunity to take his daughters to the Library of Congress to see the written text of President Lincoln’s second inaugural address, that there’s rich historical value in a document like that. 
And in some ways, my guess is that the mundane, day-to-day email that the President sends certainly wouldn’t rise to the level of interest or eloquence of the second inaugural address that was delivered by President Lincoln, but it has important scholarly value nonetheless, and the President recognizes that.  And that’s why he takes very seriously the responsibilities that he has under the Presidential Records Act to ensure that those records are properly maintained and archived.
Q    And the last question.  Prime Minister Netanyahu said this on CBS yesterday; he said the word “best deal” when it comes to the Iran negotiations.  The White House has said the words “best deal.”  There are a lot of variables out there to create a “best deal.”  What does the best deal look like when it comes to the negotiations with the world community, with Iran?
MR. EARNEST:  Well, I think, April, for obvious reasons I can’t get into a lot of detail about that.  This is something that’s currently being negotiated.  But as a principle, I can tell you that what the administration is seeking to do is to ensure that, at a minimum, the breakout time for Iran is expanded to one year. 
We know that experts right now estimate that Iran’s breakout period is about two to three months.  The breakout period refers to the time in which Iran would essentially throw off international monitoring and inspections, and run headlong toward developing a nuclear weapon.  Right now, that’s something that they could achieve in just two or three months if you listen to what some public experts -- or if you listen to what some experts have said publicly.
Under the terms of this negotiation, we would ensure that the breakout period was expanded to a year.  Now, in addition to that, what we would insist upon is that Iran commit to comply with a historically intrusive set of inspections.  And in the mind of the President, and I think in the mind of people who are willing to take a non-partisan look at this, that is the best way for us to resolve our concerns about Iran’s nuclear program; that we can push the breakout period to a year, substantially lengthen it, and impose an intrusive set of inspections that would verify Iran’s compliance with the agreement.
The wisdom of this is that if we determine that Iran is somehow not living up to the terms of the agreement, then the President will continue to have the full range of options on the table -- additional sanctions, additional coordinated steps with the international community, or, yes, even the military option, if that’s the one that we have to resort to.
But this underscores the difference in approach between Democrats -- or the President and congressional Republicans.  Congressional Republicans are ready to fast-forward to the military approach before the diplomatic approach has been given the opportunity to succeed.  And that, again, sort of reflects -- is consistent with the pattern of foreign policy decision-making that Republicans have been engaged in over the last decade or two.  It’s also an approach that has been roundly criticized by the international community.  It did lead to the diminishment of the U.S. standing on the international scene.
It also is an approach that's not been supported by the American public.  And ultimately that's the approach that -- and ultimately that is sort of the measure that we would want our political leaders to do.
Peter.
Q    Josh, just hours after President Obama finished his remarks at Selma commemorating an event that is seared in the history of the Civil Rights Movement in this country, an ugly video came out of the university -- Oklahoma University.  It showed some students using racial epithets.  The fraternity that they belong to has now been kicked off campus.  The president has come out and adamantly spoken out against this.  I’m curious if the President is aware of it, the President has thoughts on it, and just what this White House’s take is on it.
MR. EARNEST:  I have not spoken to the President about this specific issue.  But I certainly -- on behalf of everybody here at the White House, we would certainly welcome the steps that were announced both by the president of the university, as well as the steps that were taken by the national organization to completely repudiate the comments that were included in that video.  And that certainly is an appropriate step.
Q    Quickly, just going back to Hillary Clinton and the emails -- so right now, obviously she said, as the President said I should say -- he said, “I’m glad that Hillary has instructed that those emails about official business need to be disclosed.”  But is that a satisfactory bar?  Or does the President want -- or is this White House asking for some better explanation of why she was, in fact, using this private server when the rules or perhaps the law indicates that that's not the system that should have been used?
MR. EARNEST:  Well, what the administration -- at least when this regard is focused on is living up to the standard of transparency that this administration and this President has set.  And that includes ensuring that government records are properly archived and maintained at least consistent with the Federal Records Act.  And President Clinton’s -- Secretary Clinton’s team has reviewed her personal email, and forwarded the ones pertaining to her official as the Secretary of State to the State Department so that they could be properly archived and maintained.
Q    So you have faith that all the ones that had any relationship to the questions being posed have been provided?
MR. EARNEST:  Well, again, that is what Secretary Clinton’s team has said that they have done.  And I haven’t seen anybody produce any evidence to indicate that they have fallen short of what they said they were going to do.
Q    Thanks, Josh.
MR. EARNEST:  Mark.
Q    Josh, did the White House play a role in the decision to raise the reward offered for the return of Robert Levinson to $5 million, as the FBI did today?
MR. EARNEST:  Mark, I can't speak to any specific conversations that may have taken place between the White House and the FBI.  If we're able to do that, I’ll have somebody follow up with you. 
But you point out that today is the eighth anniversary of Mr. Levinson’s disappearance.  And this serves as a useful reminder of how many concerns the United States continues to have about Iran and their conduct in a wide variety of areas.  We have for eight years now been seeking information from the Iranian government about the details surrounding Mr. Levinson’s disappearance.  We have also sought agreement from the Iranian government to release those Americans who are unjustly detained in Iran.  We’ve also expressed concerns with Iran’s support for terrorism around the globe and with their anti-Semitic threats against our closest ally in the region. 
So we have a long list of concerns about Iran and their behavior.  And those concerns aren’t going to go away even if we are able to reach a negotiated solution -- or at least a negotiated commitment from Iran to try to bring their nuclear program into compliance with generally accepted international standards.  We're going to continue to have those concerns.
And, frankly, in the mind of the President, the fact that we have this long list of concerns is the reason it’s so important for us to resolve our concerns about Iran’s nuclear program; that a nuclear-armed Iran would only be able to more hostilely menace our closest ally in the region.  Iran developing a nuclear weapon and acquiring a nuclear weapon will make it harder for us to get Americans who are unjustly detained inside of Iran home.  And Iran obtaining a nuclear weapon only makes their support for terrorism around the globe more dangerous.  So the stakes are high, and certainly the occasion of the eighth anniversary of Mr. Levinson’s disappearance is an appropriate time for us to acknowledge that.
Q    Has the Levinson matter been brought up in the P5-plus-1 talks?
MR. EARNEST:  What we have said, Mark, is that we have raised these broader concerns with the Iranians on the sidelines of these talks.  We do not envision a scenario where discussions about Americans held in Iran or Mr. Levinson’s disappearance to become a specific part of the P5-plus-1 negotiations.  But because this is a priority for the United States and for this administration, securing the safe return of Mr. Levinson and other Americans held in Iran, we have in the sidelines of those talks engaged with our Iranian counterparts to let them know that we consider this a priority and that we’d like to get that information about Mr. Levinson’s disappearance, and we would like for those individuals that we already know are being held in Iran released.
Q    And how is offering a reward different from paying a ransom?
MR. EARNEST:  Well, I guess that would be a question for the FBI.  But, ultimately, presumably the payment of information would go to somebody who could help you find the individual who was missing and would not be paid to the individual who was holding that person captive.
Mike, I’ll give you the last one.
Q    When you talk about a pattern on the part of Republicans undermining the President’s ability to conduct foreign policy, I’m wondering what other examples you might offer that would fit that pattern.  I mean, you’ve talked about obviously the invitation -- the protocol involved with the Netanyahu invitation.  But what other examples could you offer?
MR. EARNEST:  Well, that we’ve seen other comments.  I did include -- I did have in mind the sort of end run that we saw House Republicans engage in, in terms of circumventing the administration and unilaterally inviting the Israeli Prime Minister to speak to a joint meeting of the United States Congress.
The other thing that I have in mind are the repeated criticisms and efforts to undermine an agreement that has not yet even be reached.  That kind of criticism from Republicans is a distortion of a deal, again, that doesn’t even exist.  So what this administration envisions is an opportunity for us to try to continue to work cooperatively with Congress in this endeavor. 
It’s yielded fruit so far that we have succeeded in putting in place a sanctions regime on Iran that has compelled them to the negotiating table; that we have succeeded in having extensive conversations between senior administration officials and leaders in Congress, frankly, without the details of those conversations leaking publicly.  That reflects some good will and some good faith.  And the administration is not just having those conversations with Democrats; we’re having them with Republicans, too. 
So it does mean that there are at least some members of Congress who are willing to contribute to this constructively.  But writing a letter like this that appeals to the hardliners in Iran is, frankly, just the latest in an ongoing strategy, a partisan strategy, to undermine the President’s ability to conduct foreign policy and to advance our interests around the globe.  And I think that’s the explanation for, I think, what you could accurately describe as a pretty forceful response to the letter today.
Q    When Democrats won back control of the House and the Senate in 2006, obviously in 2007 there were a number of efforts made to put limits on the fighting in Iraq, to cut off funding, and the President was a senator and part of that majority in the Senate at the time.  I’m wondering how you draw the line between the usual give-and-take between the branches here and what you’re calling a pattern here on the part of Republicans.
MR. EARNEST:  Well, I think what I would say about this, Mike, and you do raise -- this is one point that I have not had the opportunity to make, despite the fact that I’ve been talking a lot today -- that there is something interesting about the pattern here, which is that the administration fully believes that there is a legitimate and even an important role for Congress to play when it comes to foreign policy.  And I mean this even outside of the Iran context.  I’ve sort of talked a number of times now about sort of the role that we believe Congress should play, both in the run-up to -- in the midst of these conversations, and ultimately the role that they will play down the line in removing sanctions against Iran.
But there are other ways that Congress can and should be a part of foreign policy.  And the best example I can think of right now is the Authorization to Use Military Force.  The President has sent up language to Congress asking for Democrats and Republicans to come together around a strategy to establish a specific authorization that does not overly constrain the ability of the Commander-in-Chief to conduct foreign policy, but does ensure that Congress has a voice in making that decision.
The common thread at least between this Iran situation and the AUMF is that we see a Republican Party that is eager to direct almost unlimited authority to the President of the United States to wage war, but to try to repeatedly tie his hands when he’s trying to conduct diplomacy.  And that is the nature of the conflict that we see right now, is you have a President of the United States that is seeking to advance our national security interests around the globe using diplomacy by using our influence around the world to build international coalitions to protect our interests and to protect the American people.  The President finds that approach not just more effective, but one that has yielded important results for the American people.
The coalition that we built against ISIL is a great example of that.  There are airstrikes that are being conducted against ISIL, and there are fighters who are taking the fight on the ground to ISIL to roll back their gains.  But that fight on the ground is being led by Iraqi security forces and Kurdish security forces that are fighting for their own country.  They’re doing so in close coordination with Sunni tribal fighters as well, and that reflects the kind of political strategy that the President wholeheartedly endorses in Iraq.  But the role for the United States is one that’s limited to military airstrikes and limited to some train, advise and assist efforts.
But the point is that the reason that we’re having this conversation and this debate, in fact, is because there is a starkly different approach between the one that’s advocated by Republicans that puts the military option and war fighting at the top of the list.  That is not an approach that the vast majority of the American public supports, and it’s certainly not an approach that our recent history indicates is the best way to protect American national security interests. 
The best way for us to protect the United States, our citizens and our interests around the globe is to work cooperatively with nations around the globe and seek to advance our interests in multilateral fashion.  We did that in destroying chemical weapons in Syria.  We’ve done that in trying to degrade and ultimately destroy ISIL.  And the President is in the midst of an effort to do that as it comes -- when it comes to one of the most important national security challenges that we have right now, which is resolving the international community’s concerns with Iran’s nuclear program.
Thanks, everybody.  Have a good Monday. 
END 

	2:13 P.M. EDT
The White House
Office of the Press Secretary
James S. Brady Press Briefing Room
**Please see below for a correction marked with an asterisk.
1:10 P.M. EDT
MR. EARNEST:  Good afternoon, everybody.  It’s nice to see you all.  I don’t have any announcements to get us started, so we’ll just go straight to questions.
Julie, would you like to begin?
Q    Great.  Thanks, Josh.  I had a couple of questions to follow up on the announcements the President made last night.  To begin, the Brits said today that they will not be participating in any airstrike campaign.  And I know that officials said last night that more announcements on commitments would be coming over the next few weeks.  But in terms of airstrikes, is it your expectation that there will be other countries who will be joining the U.S. in that part of the mission?  Or is that something that is going to be left to the U.S. alone?
MR. EARNEST:  Julie, shortly before I came out here, someone read to me a statement from a spokesperson at Number 10, indicating a slightly different position than the one that you articulated.  And it is consistent with our view that we do anticipate that our allies, including the British, with whom we a have a special relationship as you know, will be active participants in supporting the international coalition to degrade and ultimately destroy ISIL. 
Any announcements that they have to make about how they will contribute to this effort will be for them to make, not for me.  But the President, when he met with Prime Minister Cameron last week in Wales, in the context of the NATO Summit, came away pleased with the level of commitment and interest that he heard from our NATO Allies, including the British.
As it relates to what other countries would participate in military action in Syria, we’ll allow those other countries to discuss what level of commitment they’re prepared to make.  But the President has indicated that he is ready to order military action in Syria, predicated on what he described as a core principle of his presidency, which is to deny a safe haven to those individuals who would seek to do harm to the United States of America.  And we are confident that military action that is required will be strongly supported by an international coalition.
Q    I’m not really asking though about specific countries here.  I’m just asking more broadly if when it comes to airstrikes, that’s something that will be kind of under the U.S. purview alone, or that will specifically be something where other countries will join in.
MR. EARNEST:  Well, again, if other countries are prepared to make a commitment about the military action that they would either support or undertake themselves, we’ll allow them to make that announcement. 
We are pleased, however, with the robust engagement that we have received already from our allies around the world and from other governments in the region who have a clear stake in the success of the strategy that the President has articulated.
Q    In terms of the President’s request for Congress to authorize the train-and-equip mission for the Syrian rebels, it appears that there is some support among leadership, including John Boehner, to move this forward, but a lot of open questions about how exactly that’s going to get done.  At this point, does the administration have a preference whether that gets done in the CR or whether there’s standalone legislation?
MR. EARNEST:  It’s our preference that Congress would add Title 10 training authority to the continuing resolution.  And the reason for that is simply that the President needs this authority as soon as possible in order to direct the United States military to ramp up our assistance to the Syrian opposition.  And that’s particularly important now because of the response that we have gotten from countries in the region, partners who are ready to support this effort. 
For example, I know that the Saudis have publicly announced their commitment to host a training operation.  That is an important commitment, and we want to ensure that we can follow up quickly on that commitment by doing our own part.  In order to do it, however, the President needs authority from Congress, and that’s why we’re asking Congress to act urgently to give him that authority.  The easiest way for us to get that done would be adding it to the continuing resolution that members of Congress are prepared to pass as early as the beginning of next week, I’m told.
Q    Is there any scenario in which the administration could move forward with this Pentagon train-and-equip mission without congressional authorization?
MR. EARNEST:  It’s my understanding that for the Pentagon to carry out a training-and-equipping mission using its Title 10 authority, it would require specific congressional authorization.  But as you point out, Julie, this authority is not authority that has attracted significant controversy in the past, so it should be the kind of authority that is granted to the administration without a lot of drama. 
Q    If I could just ask --
MR. EARNEST:  But let me just say -- I would, however, expect that members of Congress would ask questions about this authority.  And over the course of the day today, I know that there are all-member briefings that are being hosted in the House and the Senate that will be led by senior administration officials to discuss with members of Congress the strategy that the President has laid out.
So there will be an opportunity for members of Congress, who do have questions about granting the administration this authority, to ask them and to get specific answers from senior administration officials.  Again, it shouldn’t be something that’s particularly controversial, but the administration welcomes interest and questions about the programs that we can ease any concerns they may have.
Q    And if I could just ask finally whether you see any irony in using as your legal justification for these airstrikes an authorization for military force that the President himself has called for repeal of.  
MR. EARNEST:  The President did give a speech in May of 2013 -- so a little over a year ago now -- where he did describe -- let me just quote his sentence and then we can talk about it a little bit.  The President said, “I look forward to engaging Congress and the American people in efforts to refine and ultimately repeal the AUMF’s mandate.”  Two sentences later, he went on to say, “Our systematic effort to dismantle terrorist organizations must continue.”
So the President is ready to engage in a conversation with members of Congress as it relates to this specific AUMF.  And we welcome or would welcome a show of support from the United States Congress for the strategy that the President has laid out.  We have been gratified to see some public statements of support from members of Congress, including many Republicans, for the President’s strategy.  And if there are additional steps that Congress would like to consider, we would welcome them.
But the President is confident that he has the authority that he needs to order military action along the lines of the broadened systematic airstrikes that he described yesterday.
Q    Under an AUMF he wants repealed.
MR. EARNEST:  Under an AUMF that he believes continues to apply to this terrorist organization that is operating in Iraq and Syria.  And in the same speech where the President talked about his desire to refine and repeal the AUMF, the President talked about the need to confront and defeat and continue to take the fight to terrorist organizations that either do or could wish violence and harm to the U.S. homeland.
So these -- we have also articulated that the decision by members of Congress to express their support for the President’s strategy could take a variety of forms, and it is a decision for members of Congress to make.  It would be a decision or a show of support that this administration would welcome.
One potential show of support could be a refined AUMF.  But again, that’s not necessary because the President has the authority, the statutory authority that he needs.  And that’s why we have and will continue to closely consult with members of Congress about all aspects of the strategy that the President is pursuing, because we believe that it is important for the United States Congress to indicate their support for the President’s strategy; that it demonstrates to certainly our enemies, but also to our allies and to the American people, that the elected representatives of the most powerful nation in the world are united behind a specific strategy -- in this case, a strategy to degrade and ultimately destroy ISIL.

	Steve.
Q    Josh, are you saying that the U.S. will act alone on airstrikes if you have to, but you don’t think you’ll have to?
MR. EARNEST:  The question that you’re asking necessarily sort of jumps head a little bit here, and that’s why it’s a difficult one to answer.
The President has made clear that he is prepared to order military strikes in Syria against ISIL, primarily because it relates to a specific core principle of his presidency, which is that he will act to deny individuals or organizations that seek to do harm to the United States a safe haven anywhere in the world. 
Right now, there is concern about the virtual safe haven that ISIL appears to be operating in, in Syria.  The President is prepared to deny that. 
What we have also seen are strong statements -- privately -- from our allies -- some public, but mostly private -- from our allies that they share this goal; that they understand the concern that the United States has about a safe haven in Syria for ISIL.  After all, a safe haven in Syria for ISIL would also pose a threat to many of these other countries as well, including regional governments.
So there is a pretty clear set of incentives -- or interests that are lined up here.  So the President is prepared to take military action, but he is also determined to ensure that the United States assembles the kind of international coalition that would ensure the United States is not acting alone; that we are working closely and cooperatively with our allies in NATO, with our allies in other countries around the world, with our partners in the region who have a significant stake in the outcome.
And you’ve also heard -- seen other signals from the administration to indicate that there may be even other countries with whom we are not allies, but who are -- have an interest in the resolution of this situation that is consistent with the interest of the United States of America.
For example, the National Security Advisor, Susan Rice, was in China earlier this week, where she and her counterparts discussed the threat that’s posed by ISIL.  Again, China is not an ally of the United States, but we do have a relationship with them that allows us to cooperate on a wide range of issues.  This could potentially be one of them.
Q    Do you have to have the Syrian rebels trained up before you would launch airstrikes in Syria?
MR. EARNEST:  I think the answer to that is not necessarily.  The President will order military strikes at a time that he believes is consistent with our broader strategic interest.  The President does believe that we need to ramp up the assistance that we are providing to the Syrian opposition.
For some time now, the United States has been providing both military and non-military assistance to the Syrian opposition.  The President believes that we should ramp up that assistance.  However, he needs authority from the United States Congress to ramp up that assistance in the way that he would like and in the way that he believes is necessary.
But one is not predicated on the other primarily, because the goal of those -- of any military action that the President orders would be to deny ISIL a safe haven there. 
This also seems to be an appropriate time for me to remind you of another principle that the President has articulated, which is the President will not send American combat boots to fight on the ground in Syria.  He will not do that.  He is, however, prepared to order military action in Syria related to airstrikes.  And these airstrikes would both be effective in denying ISIL a safe haven in Syria, but would also be used eventually to support the efforts of the Syrian opposition to take the fight to ISIL on the ground in Syria.
Q    When the President spoke to the Saudi King yesterday, did the King himself say he would agree to host this training mission?  Or how did that process work?
MR. EARNEST:  What I can say for sure, Steve, is I know that this is an issue that the President and the King discussed in the context of our efforts to cooperate and coordinate our actions with Saudi Arabia to degrade and ultimately destroy ISIL.  Those consultations and that cooperation is ongoing.  I believe that Secretary of State John Kerry, if my memory serves me correctly, is actually there today, meeting with his counterparts in the Saudi government, as well as other leaders --or senior officials from other governments in the region.  
So our consultations and our level of cooperation is deep and will continue.  And it was at some point after that conversation that the Saudis did announce their willingness to host a training camp for the Syrian opposition.  But in terms of the details of how that business was transacted, I’m not able to present them in this context.
Move around just a little bit.  Justin.
Q    I just wanted to nail down the Title 10 thing, and I’m sorry to go into the weeds a little bit.
MR. EARNEST:  That's okay.  That's why we have these sessions, to go into the weeds.
Q    So when Julie asked her question you said that it was your understanding the Pentagon could carry out a training-and- equipping mission under Title 10, that they would need authorization to do that.
MR. EARNEST:  That's correct.
Q    But Senator Levin and the Pentagon have both said today that they have some authority to train and equip the Syrian opposition right now.  So is the difference here that this would be going from a covert sort of operation into the open?  And how, I guess, is money related to that?  So does the Title 10 authorization allow the Pentagon to go into a different type of budget that they can't access now?  Is that what the real ask that you’re going for is?
MR. EARNEST:  You’re asking me a tricky question.  I think you realize that in the way that you’re phrasing it.  (Laughter.)  Let me just --
Q    Well, but it is holding up the CR right now, so --
MR. EARNEST:  I didn't suggest it was an illegitimate question.  I just said it was a tricky one, particularly one in the context that we are talking right now.
So in this context, I’m not going to be in a position to discuss any aspect of any sort of potential covert program that may or may not exist.
Title 10, however -- ramping up our assistance to the Syrian opposition under Title 10 would be something that would be done overtly, and it would be done -- and it would require funding to support it.  That would also be overt and publicly discussed. 
The President proposed in his West Point speech that he delivered back in June *May dedicating $500 million to this Title 10 training and equipping effort.  And we would like to see -- we obviously want to ensure that this program is funded appropriately, but the concern right now on the part of the administration is that we want to get the program up and running quickly to follow up on the commitments that have been made by some of our regional partners, including the Saudis.
So we are hoping for prompt action by the United States Congress to give this authority to the administration so that this program under Title 10 can get started as soon as possible.
Q    So I mean, maybe to re-ask Julie’s question, maybe you can’t answer it -- but when Senator Levin says that the Pentagon currently has some authority to train and equip the moderate Syrian opposition, is he wrong? 
MR. EARNEST:  I’m not quite sure.  I don’t mean this to sound pejorative, as it might in other settings -- I don’t genuinely know what Senator Levin may be referring to.  So in terms of that, I’d go ask him.
What we’re referring to is this Title 10 authority that the President originally asked for back in June that we want Congress to act on quickly so that we can be responsive to the encouraging signals that we’re receiving from our partners in the region.
Q    And then, this might be another long shot, but I know that the President and Speaker Boehner spoke yesterday about sort of efforts to shoehorn this into the CR, and then now they’ve pushed off a vote until next week; there’s a lot of talk about separating it.  So I’m wondering if you can just -- I know they’re private conversations, but provide what your guys’ understanding of sort of the status of this on the Hill is.
MR. EARNEST:  Well, it’s my understanding, as Julie pointed out, that the Speaker is supportive of this effort.  I know that there are a number of other Republican members of Congress who have indicated their support for this authorization.  I know that there are Democrats who share this view, too.
My guess is that this has to do with the complicated nature of legislating.  And the role of the administration is to be clear about what our requests are -- in this case, we are being crystal clear about our desire for authority to begin this program under Title 10.  The other thing that we can do is to try to answer as many questions as possible for members of Congress who are deciding whether or not it is appropriate to grant this administration the authority.
And so we are engaged in an effort to closely consult with members of Congress.  There are individual telephone conversations starting at the highest level on this issue to make sure that members of Congress understand exactly what is being requested.  And as I mentioned, there are these broader briefings that are being convened by senior administration officials.  I know that there’s a White House official involved, and officials from some of the other foreign policy agencies, including the Department of Defense and Department of State, that would be on hand to answer questions about this program or any other aspect of the strategy that the President articulated last night.
Q    Are there any other presidential calls to -- like, specific calls to lawmakers? 
MR. EARNEST:  Probably.  (Laughter.) 

	Anita.
Q    Can you talk a little bit about how the President will get the public support for this?  Or maybe you think he has the support for it.  And how do you keep that support going when the administration has said this is a years-long effort?  As you know, we’ve talked about it a lot, that this is sort of more where -- we say that a lot -- just that we’ve gotten out of war, now we’re going back into military action.  How does he get the public on board?  Will he give speeches?  Talk some more?  What’s the engagement there?
MR. EARNEST:  And you’re talking about our broader strategy as it relates to degrading and destroying ISIL?  I would anticipate -- the President does feel a responsibility to communicate with the American public about our strategy and about his decision -- what he has described as the most difficult decision that a Commander-in-Chief has to make, which is to send our men and women in uniform into a conflict.
And the President does feel a responsibility to communicate with the American public about these issues.  That is, after all, why the President elected to deliver an address in primetime last night.  With the generous cooperation of America’s television networks, that speech was carried by -- over the airwaves, and I assume was watched by a large number of people all across the country. 
That is important because the President considers it to be a core priority of the Commander-in-Chief and as the top elected official in the country to communicate with the people who have elected him to this office -- particularly when it relates to issues of such great importance, and issues that are related directly to American national security.  So I would anticipate that the President will continue to talk about this issue and continue to provide updates to the American public about the status of our strategy. 
What we have seen is a pretty dynamic situation, fast-moving and changing.  We have seen important steps that were taken by the American military already in Iraq that have yielded important gains.  They blunted -- Kurdish security forces and Iraqi security forces worked to blunt an ISIL offensive on Erbil.  They did that with the backing and support of American military airstrikes.  Kurdish security forces were successful in retaking the Mosul Dam, which they did with the support of the American military under strikes that the President himself authorized.
We’ve also seen the American military carry out some important humanitarian actions at Mount Sinjar and in the Iraqi town of Amerli to avert humanitarian disasters.  There were -- in those two locations, there were religious and ethnic minorities that were under siege from ISIL forces who were vowing to perpetrate acts of violence against them.
So there has been -- what we have seen is a pretty active situation, and the President does want to do everything that he can to communicate with the American public as our strategy moves forward.
Q    Does he think he has the support right now for what he announced last night?
MR. EARNEST:  Yes, I do think that the President laid out a case about why it is important for our country to take the steps that he outlined.  And I think given the significance -- or given the stakes of this situation, I do think that the President has the strong support of the American public.  And I think that's indicative of the bipartisan comments that we’ve seen from members of Congress and others indicating their backing of the President.
I also think that the American people are heartened that there is a track record here -- that the President took the time to explain our strategy and to explain how it’s analogous to the success we’ve had in other contexts to implement a counterterrorism strategy that is in the best interest of the United States of America.
Let’s move around.  Zeke.
Q    Thanks, Josh.  Yesterday, both the President and senior administration officials made clear that the limitations that existed on American airstrikes in Iraq before both the humanitarian and defense roles, that both those limitations were being lifted and that the mission would expand.  So what are the new rules of engagement now for CENTCOM, which has said they’ve conducted these strikes under a blanket authorization from the President?  What did the President authorize the Pentagon and say, you can strike this, you can't strike that?  What’s now fair game?  What isn’t?
MR. EARNEST:  Well, the President has been actively engaged over the last several weeks with his national security team, including planners at the Department of Defense, reviewing targets that are available.  These targets have been exposed because of the President’s early decision to ramp up our intelligence, surveillance and reconnaissance assets that were operating in the region.  By improving our visibility into the situation on the ground, Pentagon planners have been working with some success to develop additional targets.
As the President offers guidance to the Department of Defense about the targets that are presented to him, that's how the decisions will be made about the rules of engagement, as it were.  So that's not something that I could lay out from here other than to generally describe to you that, yes, we have entered a different phase in this campaign principally because of the formation of an inclusive central government in Baghdad.
That means that the American military can more successfully use its military might and sophistication in support of a united Iraq, a united government, and a more unified security force as they take the fight to ISIL in Iraq.  And it also means that as they do that, we need to ensure that a core principle of the Obama presidency is not violated, which is we need to ensure that ISIL does not get a safe haven in Syria from which they could potentially plot, plan and execute terror plots against the United States or our interests.
Q    That account, though, seems to be a little different than what we’re hearing from the Pentagon that there was -- when they strike a Humvee or an ISIL checkpoint or a mortar position, or we’ve gotten those notifications -- three or four airstrikes a day every day for the past month, almost month and a half now -- has the President selected each of those strikes, all 155 now?  Or has he said -- what we know there was obviously -- if there’s anything that’s a threat to Erbil, that we’d go after.  Was the President involved in selecting this Humvee versus that Humvee?  Or --
MR. EARNEST:  He was not.  So let me take another crack at this.  The President was not responsible for personally signing off on each of the 150-160 or so strikes that have been publicly announced by CENTCOM. 
The President did lay out for them some criteria for those actions that were predicated on this broader strategy of placing the protection of American citizens and the execution of humanitarian operations at the top of the priority list.
The strategy has broadened and will include a more systematic set of airstrikes in Iraq and potentially in -- well, in Iraq and in Syria. 
But in terms of the specific guidance that the President has offered to the Pentagon, I can't get into a lot of detail about that guidance.  But I can tell you that the President is actively reviewing options that have been presented to him by the Department of Defense and the professionals over there who have been hard at work on this for a number of weeks now.
Q    Has that guidance been transmitted already to the Pentagon?  Or has this President still not decided which of the -- just how broad or how narrow to tailor that?
MR. EARNEST:  Well, there are still some presidential-level decisions that have to be made.  But the President has made a decision to broaden the systematic wave of airstrikes both in Iraq and in Syria to deny ISIL a safe haven.
Q    Sorry, one more, not to belabor the point, but just in terms of civilian populations, ISIS has taken over a number of Iraqi cities.  So far, the strikes haven’t taken place very close to those cities; they’ve been centered around various ISIS strongholds and checkpoints and the like.  So how will the President expand the campaign into Iraqi cities?  Will he?  Or will he avoid them and try to get ISIL fighters between cities or in the open?
MR. EARNEST:  Well, certainly any time the President authorized American military action, he’s concerned about the potential for collateral damage and any impact that that could -- that those military strikes could have on innocent civilians who are -- particularly in this case, innocent people who are caught in the crossfire.  So these are very difficult operational decisions that will have to be made on a case-by-case basis.  Many of them don't rise to a presidential level, to the level of the Commander-in-Chief.  But commanders in this area are keenly aware of this concern.
And the other thing that's important to keep in mind here as we’re talking about specific targets on the ground in Iraq -- that these American airstrikes would in many, many cases be in support of ground offensives that are carried out by Iraqi and Kurdish security forces.  So it’s important to remember that for all of America’s military might, the President is not contemplating sending American combat troops in a combat role back onto the ground in Iraq or in Syria, but rather airstrikes that could be used in support of ground offensives by Iraqi security forces or Kurdish security forces.
Michelle.
Q    Obviously, when you’re talking about reviewing targets with the Department of Defense and advisers, are you talking about targets in Syria at this point?  I just want to be clear.
MR. EARNEST:  The President has gotten guidance about targets that are available and would be critical to denying ISIL a safe haven both in Iraq and in Syria. 
Q    Are there many of them in Syria?
MR. EARNEST:  I wouldn’t characterize the guidance that the President has received from his military planners.

	Q    Okay.  And when asked in the past about the President seeming to downplay groups like ISIS just a couple of months ago, the administration has responded by saying, well, ISIS has been able to grow quite a bit in six months.  So how does the President feel confident that equipping and training elements of the moderate Syrian opposition is going to work?  How does he know that there’s going to be enough time, and that they’re going to be capable if ISIS is able to grow so quickly?
MR. EARNEST:  Well, I do want to clarify one thing that you cited there, Michelle, which is that the description that we have had about some of the extremist groups that are operating in this region of the world -- and when I say “region” I mean broadly in the Middle East -- that some of these extremist organizations are sophisticated, are large, and have pretty broad aspirations.  Some of these organizations are rather small and have rather narrowly tailored local or even sectarian interests.  And so when the President has discussed the threat that is emanating from the region, from these terrorist groups, he believes it’s important to differentiate from those smaller organizations that only have local aims, and larger organizations that may have aims or ambitions that extend beyond the local region.
Now, ISIS doesn’t fall cleanly in either of those categories.  It is obviously a large and sophisticated organization that has demonstrated a pretty substantial military prowess.  They made substantial gains across Iraq in a short period of time.  That said, the Intelligence Community has assessed that they’re not actively plotting to strike the U.S. homeland.  But our concern is that given their military prowess, that they could at some point -- particularly if they can rest easy in a safe haven -- turn their attention to the West and pose a rather dramatic threat to the West and even to the United States homeland. 
So as it relates to the question that you’ve asked about the Syrian opposition, the important element here to understand is that the United States has been providing assistance to the Syrian opposition; this is both military and non-military assistance to the Syrian opposition for over a year now.  That strategic decision has been a source of some criticism by some of the President’s political opponents who have urged him to take more decisive action to arm the Syrian opposition sooner.  They suggest that if three years ago, once Bashar al-Assad started perpetrating these widespread acts of violence against his own people, that if the United States had acted more quickly to dump a bunch of arms into that region and arm the opponents of Assad, that we wouldn’t be in the mess that we’re in right now. 
The President drew a different conclusion.  The President assessed that it would be particularly important for the United States to have a good sense of who exactly we would be arming and equipping.  And that is why the President has been deliberate about vetting the elements of the Syrian opposition.  And over the course of the last three years, the United States has gotten much greater clarity about which individuals in the region we can rely on and count on and work with, and which individuals, frankly, that we can’t.
It’s not difficult to contemplate or imagine a scenario where if the United States had put -- dumped a bunch of arms into that country three years ago, that members of ISIL or other extremist groups would be toting American arms as they wage their campaign of violence throughout that region.
So the President has been very deliberate about this.  So then the question becomes, why do you have confidence that the Syrian opposition can be successful?  And our confidence stems primarily from two things.  The first is this training -- this effort to provide military and non-military support to the Syrian opposition has been underway for over a year.  Their capacity is expanding and improving.
Secondly, and arguably even more importantly, based on the decision that the President announced last night, these Syrian opposition fighters will now be operating with the backing of the United States military.  That is to say these opposition fighters will have American aircraft taking airstrikes in support of their ground operations.  There is no doubt that will significantly enhance their capability on the battlefield.
Q    And maybe you heard on CNN last night your former boss get into it with Senator McCain.  And even today on the Senate floor, we heard him saying that it was the Iraqis who wanted a residual force to stay there.  If you heard the back-and-forth, who’s right in this?
MR. EARNEST:  I heard a little bit of the back-and-forth.  I heard enough of the back-and-forth that I’m tempted to defer all questions about Senator McCain and his criticism to my former colleague.  He acquitted himself quite well, I believe.
Q    He’s on the payroll, though.  So --
MR. EARNEST:  I guess he’s on a different payroll now, right?  Let me say -- my observation from that exchange was one you probably heard me share before, but I’ll do it again since you asked.  Since 2002, Senator McCain and Barack Obama have had very different views about our strategy in Iraq.  That is true -- that’s been true since 2002.  The differences in the strategy that they were advocating was extensively litigated in the context of the 2008 presidential election.  We had a national debate about this. 
Senator McCain repeatedly articulated his view that expanding and ramping up the number of U.S. troops in Iraq, and extending the time period by which American troops would be based in Iraq, was in the best interest of American national security.  The President of the United States articulated a very different view.  It’s the President’s view -- and this is a view that he ran on in 2007 and 2008 -- that we needed to wind down the war in Iraq and bring our troops home.  And there was a broad national debate about this, and the American people spoke very clearly at the ballot box in November of 2008.  And I say all of that as someone who has extraordinary respect for Senator McCain’s service to this country and for the sacrifice that he has made for our nation’s safety and security.
April.
Q    Josh, I’m going to ask you two questions on two different subjects.  I want to first start with last night to a couple of months ago when the President said during his speech, this big foreign policy speech, when he said, just because we have the biggest hammer doesn’t mean every problem is a nail.  How hard was it for the President, when he was -- he dug in at that time, basically talking about he’s not going to take a lot of military action and people calling for it -- to last night?  How hard was it?  And what was the tick-tock around here?  How did all of that play out?
MR. EARNEST:  What the President laid out last night, April, was a comprehensive strategy for confronting this challenge.  And I mentioned this in a conversation that I had with some of you yesterday about how overlooking the centrality of diplomacy to our strategy is to not fully appreciate the comprehensive nature of the strategy the President has put in place.
It is critically important that we build an international coalition in support of the strategy to degrade and ultimately destroy ISIL.  The President is determined to ensure that the United States is not going it alone.  That is why all of this was predicated on the formation of an inclusive Iraqi government.  Ultimately, it needs to be the responsibility of Iraq’s political leaders, Iraq’s government, and Iraq’s security forces for taking the fight to ISIL on the ground in their country.  The United States and our military can act in support of those security forces, but ultimately it needs to be their responsibility.
So the formation of an Iraqi central government and the United States using our influence in the international community and our political influence with Iraq’s political leaders to prod them toward this conclusion has been critical to our success.  The formation of an Iraqi central government that is so critical to our broader success in this endeavor did not involve the United States military; it involved the dogged efforts of diplomacy by the State Department and others who are invested in this region.
So frankly, this also included the United States making the case to other regional governments that had influence in Baghdad to convince them to make the same case that the United States was making -- that Iraq’s political leaders needed to unite that country to confront the existential threat that’s posed by ISIL.
The second component of the strategy has been predicated on regional governments taking an active role in supporting this international coalition to take the fight to ISIL.  The kinds of conversations that Secretary Kerry is having in the Middle East right now as we speak is an important part of this strategy to make sure that we are drawing upon the diplomatic and political resources of these regional governments, building strong relationships.  Many of these regional governments have strong relationships with Sunni tribal leaders in western Iraq.  Those tribal leaders can play an important role in taking the fight to ISIL in their country.  And getting them engaged and enlisted in this effort is a core component of our strategy.  And again, that doesn’t involve the United States military; that involves the political and diplomatic influence of the greatest country in the world in advancing that effort.
And as the President travels around the world -- he went to the NATO Summit -- and as he engages with world leaders on this issue, enlisting them in this effort is also a critical part of our strategy.  In some cases, they’ll provide humanitarian relief, in some cases they’ll provide diplomatic support, in some cases they’ll provide financial support, and in some cases, yes, they’ll also provide military support as well.
So the point is that -- you’re right, that just because the United States has the biggest hammer doesn’t mean that everything is a nail.  We need a comprehensive strategy that recognizes that for all of the skill and courage that’s been demonstrated by the American military, there are other resources from which we can draw that will enhance the safety and security of the United States.  And the President is committed to ensuring that we’re using all the elements of American power to advance our interests in the region and in the world.
Q    But that “hammer,” if I’m correct, encompasses airstrikes.  That hammer encompasses even the 475 people that are going over in support -- not necessarily boots on the ground, but support.  What did it take for the President to change his mind from not striking the nail to striking the nail?
MR. EARNEST:  I think the President -- on a number of occasions in countries around the world, the President has demonstrated his willingness to use the hammer of the American military to protect our national security interests.  And you can take that up with the number of terrorists who have been removed from the battlefield in places like Somalia and Yemen and even Pakistan.
Q    And my last question.  The President in the latter portion of his speech talked about the leadership of this country, and he talked about one of the components of that leadership was Ebola.  Senator Coons is calling for the United States to do more when it comes to the Ebola outbreak in Africa.  Is there plans on horizon here to do more and listen to Senator Coons and the African leaders for more help when it comes to Ebola?
MR. EARNEST:  The President in the interview that he did with Chuck Todd over the weekend identified countering Ebola as a top national security priority.  And the President and the United States have already dedicated significant resources to trying to assist the international community, support public health organizations, and offer support to these local African countries as they confront this threat.  The President made clear that it is clearly in the interest of the United States to make these kinds of investments as early as possible, and the President will be looking for ways to ramp up our assistance even further.
There have already been significant commitments that have been made by the CDC, HHS, USAID, and even the Department of Defense already to provide logistical and technical support to these efforts.  And the President is certainly considering additional ways that may be necessary to further increase our support to contain Ebola and to meet the needs of those individuals who have already been affected.
Q    So what are those considerations?
MR. EARNEST:  Well, when we have announcements to make about additional commitments, we’ll let you know.  But the President considers this, again, to be a top national security priority.  And it will continue to attract the focused attention of the President and senior members of his national security team as a result of that.
Juliet.
Q    Question about the funding for, again, the moderate Syrian opposition.  In terms of your request for Congress, the request that was made on June 26th came six days after the House had -- the full House had passed its spending bill for the Defense Department.  And obviously, some lawmakers were taken off guard.  When you go and ask them, why is it that you haven’t provided the $500 million that the administration has been asking for, one of the things that they come back with is this idea that they have not gotten the specifics they’ve been wanting to hear from the administration about how that money has been spent?
I have one other question, but could you explain exactly what has been the administration’s approach in conveying the details of this request and securing the support of it?
MR. EARNEST:  I’m going to attempt to answer your question in a way that I might regret, which is to get into the details.
Q    You’re going to get into the weeds.  (Laughter.)
MR. EARNEST:  Yes, so wish me luck.  Here’s the way I understand that this works.  The $500 million request that was made by the administration was in the context of a level of funding for overseas contingency operations, and that is where that exists. 
And I know that there is a level that's been set by the Congress for overseas contingency operations in the continuing resolution.  So that's why we’re not focused right now on the financial -- the budgetary aspect of this.  We’re focused right now on the authority aspect of this.  We are -- and again, it’s urgently needed authority.  We need to capitalize on the interest that has already been expressed by regional governments to support this effort.
And as it relates to the funding, we’re confident that we’ll be able to make the funding work.  What we need explicitly, however, is the Title 10 authority that requires an act of Congress.
Q    And so, in other words -- and, by the way, was June the first time you specifically asked in that overseas contingency funding?  That was the first time you asked for that money, however, correct?  Had you raised it earlier?
MR. EARNEST:  I believe so, yes.
Q    And then just a separate question, as you might be familiar with -- the Post reported today that General Lloyd Austin, the top commander of U.S. forces in the Middle East, had made his recommendation in terms of how to proceed against ISIL would to be send a limited number of ground troops into Iraq, primarily Special Operations to advise there.  Can you just elaborate a little on why the White House and the administration decided not to accept that advice?
MR. EARNEST:  Quite simply, the President of the United States and the Commander-in-Chief decided that it is not in the best interest of American national security to send American combat troops in a combat operation to act on the ground in Iraq.  And that is predicated on a number of things. 
But the President did make a decision, as you will note from the speech last night, to send additional American military personnel to Iraq to serve in an advise-and-assist capacity, to bolster the capacity of Iraqi security forces.  But those individuals will not be engaged in combat operations.  They are merely there to advise and assist the Iraqi and Kurdish security forces.  There are additional personnel that will be deployed to the joint operations centers to improve coordination between the United States military and the Iraqi and Kurdish security forces.  There also were military personnel that were sent to further ramp up our intelligence, surveillance and reconnaissance efforts that are underway in Iraq.
But people should just understand that that is a total of about 475 military personnel.  So there were personnel that were added to the region, but it was limited to that group of about 475 for those specific missions.
Mark.
Q    Can I ask about another partner in the coalition?  Turkey, which people sort of view as extremely important to this effort because it can seal off its border and prevent foreign fighters from going back and forth, and potentially because it could be a place for basing, is a country that has a problem because 49 of its diplomats are being held by ISIS.  When Secretary Hagel went there earlier this week, he didn't obtain any tangible commitments from the Turks, and some people are saying that until they resolve this problem of their hostages, they're going to be extremely reluctant to do anything too overt against ISIS.  Are you concerned that that's going to be an obstacle to getting the Turks on board given this vital role they have in any coalition?
MR. EARNEST:  Well, I’ll let the Turks decide for themselves about the appropriate way for them to contribute to this effort.  I will observe a couple of things.
The first is -- let me repeat from here our call for those hostages to be released immediately, and safely returned to their homes.  Let me also point out that this illustrates that the nation of Turkey has a vested interest in the success of the strategy that the President laid out to degrade and ultimately destroy ISIL. 
As the President pointed out in his remarks, this organization describing itself as the “Islamic State” is a bit of a misnomer.  They are not Islamic.  No religion condones the killing or terrorizing of innocent individuals, certainly not the religion of Islam.  It’s also not a state because it’s not recognized by any other states, and it’s certainly not recognized as a state by the individuals who are subjugated to them.
But it does illustrate that there are Sunni-led governments in the region that do have a significant stake in this outcome, and that is why you’re seeing the intensive efforts of Secretary Hagel, Secretary Kerry, and even President Obama, who met with President Erdogan on the sidelines of the NATO Summit last week, to engage them in this effort and to ensure that the resources of these regional governments that do have a significant stake in the outcome are included in this broader international coalition.
Q    And can I follow up on one other country?  Iran -- the President didn’t mention Iran last night.  Does the administration view there to be any scope for coordination or even communication with Iran, since there are obviously common interests that we share with Iran, in this case?  And if not, what role would the U.S. like to see Iran play going forward in the campaign against ISIL?
MR. EARNEST:  Well, Mark, Iran, like other nations in the region, does have an interest in not seeing an organization like ISIL wreaking havoc in their neighborhood, and even potentially on their borders.  So Iran, like the other countries in the region, does have an interest in the degrading and destroying of ISIL.
That said, the administration has previously -- and I will, again, rule out military coordination between the United States and Iran.  There have, however, been some conversations that have taken place between Iranian officials and U.S. officials on the sidelines of the ongoing P5+1 talks.  But I do want to emphasize that those conversations took place on the sidelines of those talks, not in the context of those talks.
In terms of what we would like to see Iran do, I think we have previously indicated that because of the threat that’s posed by ISIL, and because of the critical role that will and can be played by an inclusive, unified government in Iraq, that we would hope that Iran would be generally supportive of the kind of inclusive government in Iraq that is necessary to unite that diverse country to face down the existential threat that’s posed by ISIL.
We saw some indications, public statements from Iranian leaders who, in the government-formation process, did indicate their support for this kind of inclusive government.  And that kind of political support would continue to be welcomed.
Mary.
Q    Going back to the authority under the 2001 AUMF, that was for the use of force against al Qaeda and associated groups, but al Qaeda and ISIS have now split.  So can you explain how that still applies?
MR. EARNEST:  That’s a very good question and an important one.  It is the view of this administration that the 2001 AUMF continues to apply to ISIL.  Let me explain to you why.
The first reason is simply that there is a long history here; that for a decade or more, ISIL was actually known as al Qaeda in Iraq, and that there was important coordination and communication that was taking place between the leaders of al Qaeda in Iraq and the al Qaeda leadership, including Osama bin Laden.  Second -- so that long decade-long or more relationship is not something that can be disregarded as the result of one internal disagreement that was aired in public.
The second is there are indications that even after that public disagreement that you mentioned of continued ties between al Qaeda fighters, or al Qaeda operatives, and ISIL -- in fact, there are some al Qaeda operatives who have indicated that they actually believe ISIL is the true inheritor of Osama bin Laden’s legacy.  So these ties between ISIL and al Qaeda persist.
Third, we have seen ISIL continue to carry out the kinds of brutal tactics that they employed under the previous name.  We’ve seen them perpetrate terrible acts of violence against Iraqis and, tragically, we’ve seen them carry out two terrible, heinous acts of violence against at least two American citizens.  So the tactics of al Qaeda in Iraq have not changed simply because they’ve changed their name. 
And the fourth -- and this is also important -- the ultimate aspiration of al Qaeda was always the formation of an Islamic caliphate.  As their new name suggests, ISIL harbors the same ambition.  So it is the view of the United States that the -- and the Obama administration, that the 2001 AUMF continues to apply to ISIL because of their decade-long relationship with al Qaeda, their continuing ties to al Qaeda; because they have continued to employ the kind of heinous tactics that they previously employed when their name was al Qaeda in Iraq; and finally, because they continue to have the same kind of ambition and aspiration that they articulated under the previous name.
Q    So despite the split, just to be clear -- the President, legally speaking, believes that ISIS and al Qaeda, legally speaking, continue to be the same?
MR. EARNEST:  It is the assessment of the President’s national security team that the 2001 AUMF continues to apply to ISIL for the reasons that I laid out.

	Major.
Q    Josh, I’ll get to a couple of ISIL questions in a minute.  But the President made a statement just before you came out about sanctions against Russia, and this tantalizing line that they will impose “economic costs to Russia, especially in areas of importance to President Putin and those close to him.”  Please elaborate.
MR. EARNEST:  Well, I would like to, but as we’ve discussed in this format a couple of times, before sanctions are actually implemented it’s unwise for me to send clear signals about what interests may be targeted by a particular sanctions regime.  So we wouldn’t want to telegraph our plans in advance in a way that --
Q    But you are.
MR. EARNEST:  Well, but in a way that would allow those who are targets of the sanctions regime to execute some maneuvers that might allow them to escape this dragnet here. 
Q    Do you consider this a significant new step -- bringing this economic pain closer to Putin and closer to those whom he either trusts or has longstanding financial or personal relationships with?
MR. EARNEST:  Well, I think it demonstrates the determination of the international community to take the kinds of steps that impose significant economic costs on Russia for the decisions that are made by President Putin in Ukraine.  They also indicate, or demonstrate, that Russia will face additional costs and further isolation if they continue to undertake the kind of destabilizing, counterproductive actions that they’ve taken in Ukraine thus far.
Q    Based on your understanding of what these sanctions will do, in the past some in Russia who have been subject to sanctions have scoffed at their economic impact on them, taking to social media and other forms.  Do you think after these sanctions take effect they will feel them in ways they haven’t before?
MR. EARNEST:  Well, I think the numbers actually do a better job of indicating the true impact of the sanctions than the tweets of a couple of Russian officials.  There are clear metrics by which we can evaluate the success of the sanctions regime that’s been put in place.  We have seen the Russian Central Bank expend significant sums of money to try to prop up their currency.  We have seen significant private capital flight from Russia; no longer do private investors consider Russia to be such a prime area for investment.  We have seen international organizations downgrade their economic projections for Russia based principally on the further economic isolation of the country.  So there’s a lot of ways to evaluate the impact that the sanctions are having.
Q    Well, the reason I ask is Vladimir Putin is a very wealthy figure in Russia.  He has become wealthier as he has ruled that country.  Those close to him are also extremely wealthy.  And if I’m reading the President’s statement correctly, you are trying to zero in not just on the Russian economy itself and sectors of it that are potentially vulnerable, but to these people -- Putin and those close to him -- for particular economic pain.  I’m just asking, do you believe they’ll feel it after tomorrow?
MR. EARNEST:  Well, I don’t want to prejudge the sanctions too much.  But the United States has previously imposed sanctions on some Russian officials, and we do intend -- in concert, in coordination with our European allies -- to take additional steps to impose additional economic costs and further isolate Russia for their actions in Ukraine.
I’ll point out -- let me just reiterate something that the President said on Friday, which is the President is committed and is willing to begin to roll back some of those sanctions if we start to see the kinds of actions from the Russians that we would like to see.  But because we haven’t thus far, the international community is prepared to act in coordination to impose additional economic costs on them.
Q    Back to Iraq.  So this administration has said all week that it is pleased with the formation of this new unity government, and yet it does not have an interior minister, it doesn’t have a defense minister -- at least one that’s separate from the Prime Minister, who is currently occupying that job and those other two I just mentioned.  And there are also those who are experienced in analyzing Iraqi politics who say many of the other cabinet ministers are warmed-over figures from the Maliki regime.  Is this really a completely formed government?  Number one.  And number two, as unified or as inclusive as it could possibly be to achieve the kind of things this administration has said are essential to turn the tide against ISIS within Iraq? 
MR. EARNEST:  Well, Major, we are pleased to have seen a peaceful transfer of power in Iraq.  That was a very important step in that nation’s history, and does send a clear signal about the commitment of Iraq’s political leaders to trying to unite that country to face down the threat that’s posed by ISIL.
As someone who is employed by a democracy, the success of a democracy depends on a continued commitment to refining and strengthening that democracy.  Our democracy has been in place for more than 200 years now, and we are engaged in a daily effort to strengthen and improve our democracy.
What we would like to see and what we hope to see is the continued commitment of Iraq’s political leaders and Iraq’s people to invest in and strengthen their democracy. 
So that said, there was a very important step that was taken earlier this week -- to appoint a cabinet that reflects the diversity of that country.  It is important that they actually follow through on the mandate that they have to govern that country and to lead that country in an inclusive way, so that they unite the country, strengthen the security forces, and face down the threat that’s posed by ISIL.
The United States and the international community will stand with them as they do it.  But ultimately, no one can do it for them.  It will be the responsibility of Iraq’s people to do --
Q    More precisely, is the administration content with the situation where the cabinet has two of the key posts -- interior and defense -- held by the Prime Minister?  Or do you want other figures who are more representative, more inclusive to eventually be appointed to those posts?
MR. EARNEST:  Well, it’s the responsibility of Iraq’s political leaders to determine who will serve in the Iraqi government.  We’re not going to dictate outcomes here; we never have.
Q    Right.  But is our support and enthusiasm and rhapsodic embrace of this unity government contingent upon doing things that are more --
MR. EARNEST:  I’ll call that a compliment.  (Laughter.)
Q    Well, I was --
MR. EARNEST:  Rhapsodic.  No one has ever accused me of that before.  (Laughter.) 
Q    There’s all this enthusiasm for a unity government, which has two key cabinet posts held by the Prime Minister.  I’m just wondering, is that really good enough?
MR. EARNEST:  We have been gratified to see the peaceful transfer of power that took place a couple of days ago.
Q    That’s a separate question.
MR. EARNEST:  Well, it’s not really a separate question.  We have been pleased --
Q    You can have a new Prime Minister that’s peaceful in a transition, but then when you form a cabinet where two of these vital posts are held by the Prime Minister, that seems a little bit insufficient, doesn’t it?
MR. EARNEST:  There certainly is additional work to be done, and the United States and the international community will be watching Iraq’s political leaders and the leaders of that government as they set about governing and leading that country.  And we will continue to call on them to govern in a way that unites the diverse populations in Iraq to ensure that every citizen in Iraq can feel like they have a legitimate representative in Baghdad, and somebody in their central government who is looking out for their interests.
That’s what it means to govern in a way that unites the country.  That’s critically important when your country is facing an existential threat like Iraq is right now at the hands of ISIL.
Q    Just to follow up, one last one on Juliet’s question about Special Operations.  Is that a permanent declaration -- the President will not introduce Special Operations forces either into Iraq or Syria?  Or just this particular recommendation was rejected and others can be proffered in the future?
MR. EARNEST:  Well, Major, you know that it has been publicly reported that earlier this summer there was an operation in Syria --
Q    Sure, yes.  We already know that.  I’m talking about going forward.
MR. EARNEST:  Well, I think what that is an indication of is that the line the President is drawing is about a sustained combat operation -- a ground war, if you will -- in Iraq and Syria.  The President will not allow the United States to be dragged back into a ground war.  And that is why the President is not contemplating deploying additional combat troops on the ground in either Iraq or Syria.
Q    But he remains open to mission-specific applications -- Special Operations forces if the need arises?
MR. EARNEST:  I’m not willing to broadly take anything -- to broadly take anything off the table.
Q    So he’s open to it.
MR. EARNEST:  The President, I think, has been really clear about what his intentions are, and ruling out the kind of ground war in Iraq and Syria that involves American personnel that the President does not believe would be in the interest of our national security. 
Olivier.
Q    Thanks, Josh.  I’ve got a couple for you.  One is, you mentioned U.S. airstrikes being in support of these -- the future-trained moderate Syrian opposition.  Those folks have two enemies in Syria.  They have ISIL -- maybe more than that, but let’s just stipulate the two -- ISIL and Assad.  As the President looks at targets in Syria, which you’ve also mentioned, is he ruling in or ruling out possible American strikes on Syrian government forces?
MR. EARNEST:  The focal point of the operations that the President has authorized are related to preventing ISIL from obtaining a safe haven in Syria.  And if there are elements of ISIL forces or -- as we’ve demonstrated in Iraq -- other logistical elements of the ISIL fighting forces that can be neutralized through the use of American military power, that’s something the President won’t hesitate to order.  But ultimately, the goal here is to prevent ISIL from obtaining a safe haven.
Q    I get that, but they’re kind of having a pincer movement here, quite deliberately on the part of the Assad regime.  So I don’t want to -- your comments either, but are you saying that somewhere down the line the President could view a military strike against Syrian government assets to be in legitimate support of this broader goal?
MR. EARNEST:  Well, what the President is focused on right now, and the authorization that he feels he has under the 2001 authorization to use military force, is to take the steps that are necessary to prevent ISIL from establishing a safe haven in Syria and succeed in degrading and ultimately destroying ISIL.  That is the focal point of our operations there.
Q    That actually helps a little bit for my second question, which is a little bit broad and a little bit hypothetical.  But what does a victory look like here?  I mean, you’ve talked about destroying ISIL; I honestly don’t know what that means.  What does it mean?
MR. EARNEST:  I didn’t bring my Webster’s Dictionary with me up here.  (Laughter.) 
Q    Oh, don’t do that.  Come on.
MR. EARNEST:  Well, you know --
Q    But you guys keep talking about that.  I understood it when he said --
MR. EARNEST:  I actually think that’s a pretty illustrative phrase to use to describe the situation that we envision.  We’ve talked about the threat that ISIL poses in the context of foreign fighters.  We’ve talked about the threat that ISIL poses in the context of gaining the kind of safe haven that would allow them to plot and carry out conspiracies that could lead to catastrophic attacks on the West or even on the American homeland.
Those are the two principal threats that we are concerned about as it relates directly to American national security.  There are other interests that we have here.  There’s clearly the -- ISIL forces wreaking havoc in this already volatile region of the world is not in our best interest.  And we have, therefore, an interest in acting with the international community to try to stabilize the situation.  We can do that in a way that doesn’t require the introduction of American ground combat troops to Iraq or Syria, but rather we can deploy a tried-and-true counterterrorism strategy that this administration has used successfully in other contexts.
And essentially, that means building up support for fighters on the ground, ramping up our support to Iraqi and Kurdish security forces, and ramping up our support to Syrian opposition fighters.  It means building an international coalition and it means using, selectively, American military might to aid those fighters who are taking the fight to the terror elements on the ground in their own country.
And ultimately, that is the strategy that we’re using to accomplish this broader goal of degrading and ultimately destroying ISIL.
Q    -- better grasp on the strategy than on the end state here.  As you invoke Yemen and Somalia as models for this campaign, those two conflicts seem to be ongoing -- and, to be perfectly honest, it looks more like making both of the groups in question a manageable problem, to use a phrase.  Can you tell us why that’s the -- I assume you’re going to tell me that’s the wrong take, but those conflicts look open-ended; they don’t seem to be winding down any time soon.  They seem to require a perpetual commitment of American military force.  Is that what’s going to happen here?  We’re going to pin ISIS down in a corner somewhere in Syria or somewhere else, and as long as they don’t threaten the United States we’re content to carry out these kinds of missions for the foreseeable future?
MR. EARNEST:  Well, the reason that we cite those examples, Olivier, is that, particularly in Yemen, the United States has been engaged in an effort -- in a counterterrorism strategy to degrade the capacity of the terror organizations that are operating in that region of the world.  Our goal is obviously to ultimately destroy them, as well. 
This counterterrorism strategy -- again, I’ll shorthand it here, but it’s important for people to understand -- this is the strategy that the President has deployed with some success in these countries.  By building up the capacity of ground troops in those countries, in Yemen and Somalia, by building an international coalition -- in some cases that's African Union fighters; in some cases that's fighters that are from other countries -- we are succeeding in mitigating the threat that is posed by these terror organizations.
And in both of those situations, the President has selectively and strategically brought American military might to bear in support of those ground troops to mitigate and counter the threat that's posed by AQAP, specifically in Yemen, and al Shabaab in Somalia.  Just last week there was news out of Somalia that the leader of al Shabaab was killed in a military strike.  That is an indication of the success that that strategy is having in mitigating and countering the terror threat from those organizations.
Now, you do point out something that's important for people to recognize.  Both in Somalia and Yemen, the United States remains vigilant about the threats that are emanating from those countries.  That is to say, there’s still more work to do in those countries.  But what has been put in place is a counterterrorism strategy that has succeeded in degrading the threat and making those organizations less capable of threatening the American people.  That strategy has been successful, and there is an analogous -- each of these situations is different -- but there’s an analogous strategy that the President intends to deploy to this situation, as well.

	Ed.
Q    Josh, I wanted to ask -- I want to go to Iraq and Syria.  But first, NFL -- on Monday, you commented on the Ray Rice situation because I asked you a question about it.  But later that night you put out another statement because the President wanted to comment on that, and to the effect said, men have to lead the way in showing respect for women.  So since a lot has happened since Monday, I wonder if the President believes that the NFL commissioner, Roger Goodell, has handled this investigation in a way that is respectful to women?
MR. EARNEST:  I haven’t heard the President comment specifically on the actions or the way that -- or the handling of the situation by the National Football League.
Q    You have the National Organization for Women saying that Goodell should resign.  Does the White House have any view on that?
MR. EARNEST:  We do not.
Q    Okay.  The President said he wants buy-in from Congress.  One thing that Speaker Boehner -- he has expressed support for some aspects of this strategy it seems, but today he said, “An F-16 is not a strategy.  And airstrikes alone would not accomplish what we’re trying to accomplish.  And the President has made clear he doesn't want U.S. boots on the ground.  Well, somebody’s boots have to be on the ground.”  In the case of Syria, it seems like it would be the Free Syrian Army.  How does the President make the case to people like Speaker Boehner that they're the appropriate people to be ground troops when just a few weeks ago the President was mocking the Free Syrian Army?
MR. EARNEST:  I don't think I would describe the President’s words that way.
Q    When he said they were doctors, dentists, pharmacists, and that it was a --
MR. EARNEST:  Those are all honorable professions. 
Q    They're honorable, yes, but not necessarily warriors.  (Laughter.) 
MR. EARNEST:  That's correct that they are not. 
Q    And he also I think used the word “fantasy,” which is not usually a positive word, right? 
MR. EARNEST:  Well, but that was a description of our critics who had suggested that if the President had armed these individuals three years ago that we’d be better off.  As I pointed out in response to Michelle’s question --
Q    Right.  So he seemed to have a dim view of arming them, however, is the point.
MR. EARNEST:  Well, he did not, Ed.  What he had is he had a view that it would be unwise to begin arming these individuals before they had been thoroughly vetted.  And it is the view of this administration that had arms been dumped into this already very violent, chaotic situation before a proper vetting of the opposition figures, we would actually probably be in a much worse, more violent situation than we find ourselves right now. 
So because of the support that we have already provided to the Syrian opposition over the last year, that support has taken both military and non-military forms.  The capacity of the Syrian opposition is bigger, is broader, is stronger.  And there’s no question that those opposition fighters will be more effective when they have the backing of the United States military.
Q    Last thing.  The President -- you cited a few moments ago that the President has this defining principle of the administration, I think you said -- you come after America, there’s not going to be a safe haven for you.  I thought a few weeks ago the President said the defining principle of his foreign policy was “don't do stupid stuff.”  What happened to that?
MR. EARNEST:  Well, I do think that the President and members of his administration would believe that arming Syrian opposition members without vetting them would qualify as something that would be stupid.  That's why the President believes --
Q    But isn’t it obvious that a President shouldn’t do stupid stuff?  Like that would not be what you were prefer to do, right? 
MR. EARNEST:  One would hope.  One would hope.
Q    Right.
MR. EARNEST:  But certainly the administration believes that it is important to vet members of the Syrian opposition.  That is why now, three years later, we are in a position where after vetting them, we do have a much better sense of who these individuals are, whether or not they can be trusted.  We have an established relationship with them.  And that will make the assistance that we can provide them that much more effective.
That is why over the course of the last year the administration has been providing military and non-military support to the Syrian opposition to expand their capacity.  The President wants to ramp up that assistance.  That's why he’s asking Congress to give him Title 10 authority to do exactly that.  And we are confident that with the backing of the United States military, these Syrian fighters will be even more effective.
Chris. 
Q    Thanks, Josh.  I want to ask you about the President’s statement and your reiteration today that the line is drawn at a ground war.  Given the escalation that we have seen just over the last couple of months both in the rhetoric from “JV team” to “cancer” last night, from what was largely a defensive posture of protecting Americans on the ground, protecting infrastructure, protecting Yezidis, Christians, other minorities who were in danger of extinction, to what he outlined yesterday, which was an offensive posture -- how do you speak to the concern that so many people have about mission creep?
MR. EARNEST:  Well, let me say the last point that you raise I think is the most important one, so let me start there.  Back in June -- many of you will remember this -- back in June, when ISIL made this dramatic advance across western and northern Iraq, there were a lot of questions that were raised in the international community about what the response should be.  And the President on his way to a trip to North Dakota stopped on the South Lawn in front of the microphones, standing in front of Marine One, and delivered a statement and answered some questions that explained what our strategy was going to be.
And the President indicated back then from the very beginning that our strategy would be predicated on the formation of an inclusive Iraqi government, and that he did not want to be in a position where the United States was providing military support to a government that was governing in a sectarian fashion. 
The reason for that is simple:  There needed to be an incentive for Iraq’s political leaders to change course.  The fact that they were governing in such a sectarian way previously is what led to the significant weakening of Iraq’s security forces.  So by providing an incentive to Iraq’s political leaders to form an inclusive government that would actually succeed in uniting the country, the President indicated a willingness, after the formation of that inclusive government, to bring to bear American military force in a way that would do more to support the efforts of Iraqi and Kurdish security forces who are taking the fight to ISIL on the ground.
So we’ve been candid about the fact that we have entered a new phase.  After the formation of this Iraqi government, a couple of days in advance of their constitutional deadline, that we’ve entered a new, more offensive phase.  And that means the United States deploying additional military might to degrade and ultimately destroy ISIL. 
It’s important, however, to understand that we would do that in support of Iraqi and Kurdish security forces that are fighting on the ground and with the full cooperation and coordination and input of the broader international community; that we have regional governments and allies around the globe that have asked us to contribute to this effort. 
And this multifaceted effort that includes the use of American military force is part of this next phase of the operation.  But it does, however, relate to a core principle the President has articulated -- not just in the context of ISIL’s advance earlier this summer, but in the context of his broader presidency, which is this principle that individuals and organizations will not be -- who seek to do harm to the United States of America will not be allowed to establish a safe haven anywhere in the world.  We will go where is necessary to deny them that safe haven.
And that is exactly the strategy that the President has laid out for dealing with ISIL.  The President has done his best, and I think he has succeeded, in trying to communicate clearly with all of you and with the American public about what our strategy is for dealing with this situation, and how he wanted to pursue the kind of outcome that reflected American national security interests.
Q    Let me ask you, then, in that context about -- and you mentioned it, 475 additional troops to advise and assist -- which does bring the number to about 1,600 in Iraq -- and about 150 of them are in forward positions, the most dangerous positions.  So again, it leads to the question of slippery slope and the concern a lot of people, including the American people, have about the escalation of putting American troops in harm’s way.
MR. EARNEST:  I’ll say a couple of things about that.  The first is that the other individuals, the other American servicemembers who are in harm’s way are those American pilots who are conducting these airstrikes.  Those airstrikes are not without risk.  They involve making themselves vulnerable to carry out their missions.  Obviously, the level of vulnerability they face is different than a large-scale occupation by ground forces, but it is a risk nonetheless.  That is why the President reiterated in his remarks last night his appreciation and admiration for the courage and service of our men and women in uniform. 
That said, what’s also different is you’re talking about, yes, 150 American servicemen -- or American personnel who are in forward positions, who are working closely with Iraq and Kurdish security forces as they take the fight to ISIL.  I would just point out that that is a pretty stark difference than the 150,000 American servicemembers who were on the ground in Iraq when this President took office. 
So the President has been very clear about the constraints that he has imposed on -- or at least the limits that he has imposed for pursuing this strategy.  And the American people can have confidence in that strategy and in the limits that the President himself has imposed.
Roger, I’ll give you the last one.
Q    Thank you.  You were talking about the threats to the West a few moments ago.  Islamic militants have been tracked through the social media discussing how to enter the U.S., partly through the Mexican border and elsewhere.  You also have the problem of Americans with passports going over there and then coming back posing a threat.  What steps are being taken to tighten borders and deal with the passport issue?
MR. EARNEST:  Well, I will say that, as a factual matter, we don’t put a lot of stock in reports that the -- that right now, that extremists are attempting to enter the United States through the southern border with Mexico.  I know that there are some senior officials in the American government, if you will, who are making that accusation.  That certainly doesn’t reflect the observation and analysis of our intelligence community.
That said, the Department of Homeland Security and the Secretary of Homeland Security has talked extensively, including most recently in a speech that he delivered yesterday, about the efforts that are underway to counter the threat that is posed by foreign fighters.  Foreign fighters, it’s a bit of a misnomer --so let me explain to those who may be watching that these are individuals with Western passports -- Americans -- who have traveled to the region in Syria and Iraq to take up arms and fight alongside ISIL.  These individuals are dangerous because they are now battle-hardened.  They’ve received training and equipment, and demonstrated a willingness to die for their cause.
These individuals also have a passport in their back pocket, and it means that they could, with very -- in an almost unfettered way, travel back to the West and potentially carry out acts of violence.
That is why the United States, for months now, has been closely coordinating with our partners around the globe to try to mitigate this threat.  We’ve been doing this through intelligence channels, through law enforcement channels, through diplomatic channels and even through national security channels to ensure that we’re doing everything we can to try to protect the American people and Western interests from this threat.
There are organizations like --
Q    Any specific steps though?
MR. EARNEST:  We are constantly assessing the security posture of the United States, particularly when it comes to border security.  And we will make changes to that posture as needed to protect the American people.  Sometimes the changes to that posture, that security posture is evident to the traveling public; sometimes it’s not.
But rest assured there are national security professionals and law enforcement professionals who are hard at work at this moment, and they are 24 hours a day, seven days a week focused on protecting the American people from this specific threat.
Thanks a lot, everybody.  We’ll see you tomorrow.
END

	2:36 P.M. EDT
The White House
Office of the Press Secretary
James S. Brady Press Briefing Room
**Please see below for a correction to the transcript, marked with an asterisk.
1:21 P.M. EDT
MR. EARNEST:  Good afternoon, everybody.  Happy Friday.  Let me just do a quick announcement at the top, Jim, and then we’ll go to your questions.
On Tuesday, September 16th -- that’s next Tuesday -- the President will travel to Atlanta, Georgia, where he will visit the Center for Disease Control and Prevention to receive a breaking -- I’m sorry, let’s start over again. 
The President will travel to the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention to receive a briefing on the outbreak of the Ebola virus in West Africa, discuss the U.S. response to that outbreak, and thank the scientists, doctors and health care workers who are helping those affected by the disease at home and around the world.  The President will also receive an update on the respiratory illness that’s been reported in several states across the Midwest.
That evening, the President will travel to Tampa, Florida, where he will remain overnight.
On Wednesday, the President will visit U.S. Central Command at MacDill Air Force Base in Tampa, Florida.  As many of you know, Central Command’s area of responsibility includes 20 countries in the Middle East and Central and South Asia, including Iraq and Syria.  As we implement the President’s strategy to degrade and ultimately defeat ISIL, it’s the men and women of CENTCOM who will partner with others in the region to carry out our limited military mission in those countries.  While at CENTCOM, the President will receive a briefing from his top commanders there, and thank the servicemembers for their continued hard work on these efforts.
We’ll have some additional logistical details about the President’s trip over the weekend and then again on Monday.  So should be an interesting trip of the President at the beginning of the next week.
Jim, let’s go to your questions.
Q    Thanks, Josh.  I wanted to ask you about Islamic State.  Yesterday, Turkey didn’t sign on to the communiqué in Saudi Arabia expressing support for confronting Islamic State.  There have been concerns also about whether Kuwait and Qatar are doing enough to prevent fundraising for extremist groups.  I’m wondering, is the White House satisfied with the level of commitment that it’s getting from certain allies in the Middle East in dealing with and confronting Islamic State?
MR. EARNEST:  Jim, I’m pleased that you mentioned the communiqué, because I do think that there are a couple of important things about it.  The first is, it’s important for people to understand that the communiqué was signed by ministers representing states of the Gulf Coast Cooperation Council -- or the Gulf Cooperation Council -- Egypt, Iraq, Jordan, Lebanon and, of course, the United States.  And in the context of this communiqué, each of those organizations and countries declares “their shared commitment to stand united against the threat posed by all terrorism, including the so-called Islamic State in Iraq and the Levant, to the region and the world.”
Over the course of the communiqué, they lay out their commitment to “do their share in the comprehensive fight against ISIL, including” -- and then they list several things, and it ends with “as appropriate, joining in the many aspects of the coordinated military campaign against ISIL.”  That is an early indication of the interest that the United States is seeing from our partners in the region in presenting a united front to the terrorists in ISIL.  There is a strong commitment from these countries in the region to working with the international community to deny ISIL the kind of safe haven that would pose a significant threat to countries in the region, but also countries around the world.
This will continue to be an ongoing effort to build support to identify needs and to identify the specific capabilities of countries where they could meet the needs of the broader coalition.
So this is difficult work, but the President, as he indicated in his news conference at the NATO Summit at the end of last week, has been pleased with the reception that we have gotten from our partners and allies around the world as it relates to their willingness to engage in the efforts of this international coalition to degrade and ultimately destroy ISIL.
Q    But any disappointment that particularly Turkey, a NATO member, would not sign on to something like this?
MR. EARNEST:  Well, as you mentioned, each country has their own specific set of interests that are related to this specific situation.  There is no doubt -- and we have seen this both in private comments from Turkish officials, but also in public comments from Turkish officials -- that they are concerned, and rightly so, about the instability and violence that has been created by ISIL.  This is obviously all occurring right on the doorstep of Turkey, and they are rightly concerned.
I understand that the Secretary of State is actually there today, I believe, to meet with Turkish officials and his counterparts.  The President had the opportunity to visit with President Erdogan at the NATO Summit last week.  The Secretary of Defense, Chuck Hagel, was in Turkey at the beginning of this week.  So that’s an indication of the thorough consultation that is underway between the United States and Turkey to discuss with them what role they can play and how they can contribute to this broader international coalition.  We certainly welcome the partnership and alliance that we have with Turkey, and look forward to their efforts to join with the international community to meet this threat.
Q    Yesterday you mentioned that one way that Congress could support the President’s strategy in Iraq and Syria, and while you said it wasn’t necessary, it could be by providing authority on a revised use-of-force agreement.  Does the President intend to send Congress a revised authorization for use of force that Congress could act on to provide that kind of support, even though you feel it’s not necessary?
MR. EARNEST:  Well, at this point, we have not.  And I don’t know of any plan to do so at this point.  As you pointed out, it is the view of this administration, and the President’s national security team specifically, that additional authorization from Congress is not required; that he has the authority that he needs to order the military actions that he has to degrade and ultimate destroy ISIL.  That will be done in coordination with a broader international coalition.  It will not include U.S. troops being placed into ground combat in Iraq or Syria. 
That all said, the President would welcome support from Congress for this strategy.  There are a variety of ways that Congress could indicate this support and the President believes that this support -- or this indication of support -- would be beneficial because it would demonstrate to our allies and to our enemies that the United States stands united in pursuit of the strategy to degrade and destroy ISIL.
Q    Finally, on immigration.  The Associated Press is reporting that there has been a marked decline in deportations and the pace is fewer than it has been since 2007.  I’m wondering if that’s a deliberate effort by the White House or the administration to cut back on deportations, given the criticism that the President has received from the immigration community.
MR. EARNEST:  Deportations are an enforcement action, and those enforcement actions are made by law enforcement officials at the Department of Homeland Security.  So this is not something that is mandated by the White House.  These are enforcement decisions that are carried out by law enforcement officials at the Department of Homeland Security. 
However, I do think that these numbers do reflect something that the President has talked about a little bit, which is that as we confronted a situation at the border earlier this summer -- a situation that has abated -- but at one point earlier this summer, there was concern about having the needed resources to deal with a surge that we had seen along the southwest border as it relates to children who are attempting to enter the country who were not traveling with an adult.  And the President did indicate that we, as an administration, would shift resources from the interior of the country to the border to supplement our efforts to secure the border and to process the cases of those who had been apprehended at the border attempting to gain entry into the country. 
The shifting of those resources may have something to do with those numbers, but that is not -- but, again, those numbers reflect the enforcement activities of law enforcement officials at the Department of Homeland Security.
Roberta.
Q    On Ex-Im Bank.  It seems that lawmakers are expected to extend the charter for nine more months, and I’m wondering whether the White House has concerns about the brevity of that extension.
MR. EARNEST:  Well, Roberta, the thing that we have indicated is that it was incredibly important for Congress to reauthorize the Ex-Im Bank.  The Bank plays a key role in creating jobs and stimulating economic growth.  There are many businesses large and small all across the country that benefit from the activities of the Ex-Im Bank.  And this is -- support for the Ex-Im Bank has traditionally been a bipartisan proposition.  In the past, I’ve read quotes from people like President Reagan himself who signed legislation to reauthorize the bank.  At the time, President Reagan articulated the variety of reasons why the Ex-Im Bank was beneficial for the American economy and important to American job creation.  That is also why organizations like the Chamber of Commerce that don’t often agree with the President’s policies do in this case support the President’s view that the Ex-Im Bank should be reauthorized.
Q    But are you concerned about the brevity that Congress has -- are you concerned, though, about the brevity of the proposed extension?
MR. EARNEST:  Well, this is -- reauthorizing the bank is the responsibility of the United States Congress.  And I know that there have been efforts underway to pass legislation to reauthorize it.
It is the view of the administration that the bank should be reauthorized because of the important role it plays in stimulating economic growth and creating jobs.  But as it relates to the length of time over which -- for which the bank is reauthorized, we have not taken a position on that.  Our view is just that the Export-Import Bank does work that’s important for the American economy and for American job creation, and it should continue to do that work.
Q    And on the Russian sanctions announced today, how concerned is the White House about the financial impact these sanctions will have on U.S. energy companies?
MR. EARNEST:  Well, Roberta, when it comes to sanctions, what the United States is focused on is acting in coordination with our allies, particularly our allies in Europe.  The impact of these sanctions is always implemented in a way to maximize the impact on the Russian economy, to minimize the impact on the American economy, and ensure -- or at least do our best to make sure -- that American businesses are not put at a significant disadvantage vis-à-vis their competitors in other countries that are not working closely with the United States on a sanctions regime.
So there is an element of coordination here that does play a role in the decisions that are made about sanctions regimes that are put in place.  We believe that the sanctions regime that has been put in place, again, in concert with our European allies, will focus the impact on the Russian economy, will reduce the exposure that American businesses have to businesses that may try to game the system in a way that would give them an unfair advantage. 
But we are certain at -- or we are confident that this new round of sanctions will have economic costs for Russia.  And they are indicative of the international community’s resolve to standing up for the territorial integrity of the people of Ukraine, and ensuring that all countries -- including Russia -- abide by generally accepted international norms that relate to the sovereignty of independent nations.
Let’s move around a little bit.  Justin.
Q    I wanted to ask about the CR.  I know we’ve talked a lot about adding to the CR, but it strikes me that since Republicans rolled it out earlier this week, we haven’t heard from you guys whether you would sign the CR as presented by the Republicans -- the House Republicans.
MR. EARNEST:  Well, Justin, the administration has been consulting with Democrats and Republicans on Capitol Hill about the continuing resolution.  There are certain aspects of the continuing resolution that are important.  We have indicated that we believe that the best way for Congress to act on the Title 10 authority to train Syrian opposition fighters is for Congress to add that authority to the continuing resolution.
So we’re working closely with Congress.  I don’t believe that we’ve issued a statement of the administration position on the continuing resolution at this point, but it is part of the ongoing consultation that we are having with members of Congress in both parties.
Q    Would the President sign something that overfunds his defense ask?  It’s like a tactic that House Republicans seem to be using so that they would have more leverage in the December round of budget negotiations.  So if a CR is sent to the White House that overfunds the defense ask, is that something that you guys would consider signing?
MR. EARNEST:  I’m not in a position at this point, Justin, to confirm which aspects of the CR are aspects that we support, and which are deal-breakers or which aspects --
Q    Are there any deal-breakers when it comes to --
MR. EARNEST:  -- of their proposals that they can live with. 
So again, I’m not here at this point to issue a veto threat of any kind.  I can confirm for you that there are some things that we care about being included in the CR -- Title 10 authority is one of them.  And we’re continuing to work with Democrats and Republicans on Capitol Hill to ensure that whatever continuing resolution is passed by the Congress is something that the President can sign.
Of course, the reason that we’re having this conversation is because the President does believe that we should risk the traction that our economy has gained by shutting down the government.  So we’re confident that we can work through any differences of opinion and hopefully end up in a place where Congress can quickly pass a continuing resolution that includes Title 10 authority so that the President can pursue the national security priority that he discussed in his speech on Wednesday night.
Q    And then just finally on the CR.  I know that you had expressed some skepticism, and certainly some Democrats raising some money had expressed some skepticism that Republicans would pass a CR and prevent a government shutdown.  So I’m wondering -- I know you guys have been talking to the Hill -- if you right now believe that Congress will pass a CR before the end of the month.
MR. EARNEST:  I would hesitate to make predictions about the future, particularly when it relates to issues like this.  But I would say that the kinds of conversations that we’ve been having with members of Congress over the course of this week about the continuing resolution have been constructive.  And that is encouraging.  I think both sides acknowledge that a government shutdown would have a very negative impact on our economy.  And based on the constructive conversations we’ve had so far, we believe that we should be able to get this done in a timely fashion.  It certainly would fall in line with the national security priority that the President has laid out.
Victoria.
Q    Yes, a couple things.  One is on the Arab states.  They said that they would be prepared to do their share, and they talk about “as appropriate, joining in many aspects.”  But this language is a little amorphous.  It’s hard to get your hands around it.  What are they actually saying that they would do, besides Saudi Arabia hosting the Syrian rebels for training?  Will they provide troops, for example?
MR. EARNEST:  Well, Victoria, each of these individual nations has their own calculation about what they’re in a position to provide.  And when they’re ready to make announcements about what they’re going to provide, I’m certainly not going to announce it from here; we’ll allow these other countries to make their own announcements about their contribution to this international effort.
We are pleased by the initial reaction we’ve received from governments in the region and from our allies around the world as it relates to their willingness to participate in a robust fashion in this broad international coalition that the United States is leading. 
So this will be an ongoing effort by the United States to cultivate this broader international coalition.  But I can tell you that the first round of conversations that we’ve had have been positive, and we’re going to continue to engage deeply with these nations as we determine what sort of contributions make the most sense for the success of the international coalition. 
That’s the other piece of this that’s important for people to understand -- that we want to make sure that people aren’t just making commitments in a way that isn’t carefully integrated with the commitments that are made by other members of the coalition; that as we can sort of draw up a list of needs, as we’ve identified them, and then go out and seek commitments from specific countries based on their expertise or their capability to fill those needs, that will be a way for us to coordinate and integrate this international coalition in a way that will make it efficient and successful.
Q    And the CIA is reporting that they’ve seen a surge in recruitment for ISIS, up to maybe 31,000 fighters now.  Do you think you have sufficient Syrian rebel fighters to train to take them on?
MR. EARNEST:  Well, Victoria, the intelligence community has assessed that ISIL can muster between 20,000 and 31,500 fighters across Iraq and Syria.  And that’s based on a new review of all-source intelligence reports.
They have indicated that the increase in ISIL fighters is an indication that the group has had some recruitment success after the battlefield successes that they demonstrated back in June.  And it reflects some better insight that the intelligence community has been able to gain into the activities of ISIL.
We are confident that the strategy that the President has put forward and discussed in his primetime address on Wednesday night is sufficient to meet the threat that is posed by ISIL, even given the assessment that they may be able to muster a slightly larger force than was previously believed.
Q    So you think you can get enough Syrian rebels who are trainable to take them on?
MR. EARNEST:  Again, Victoria, there are a large number of components of this strategy, and we are confident that this comprehensive strategy that includes diplomatic intelligence and, yes, military components, is the right one to succeed in degrading and ultimately destroying ISIL.
Let’s move around. Zeke.
Q    Thanks, Josh.  Just going back to a conversation we had earlier this week about immigration.  I know that it’s dropped a little bit off the front burner this week, but the President was supposed to announce his decision on the executive actions at the end of the summer, which is about eight or nine days away from now.  But now he has delayed the announcement.  But has the President made the decision about what he wants to do after the election?  Has he made a decision and is just not telling people because of the politically charged climate?  Or has he -- or for some reason -- you’ve offered a reason why he is not announcing it now, but why hasn’t he made a decision yet?
MR. EARNEST:  Zeke, the President was asked this question in the interview that he did over the weekend with Chuck on “Meet the Press.”  And what he indicated is that he was still waiting to cross some t’s as it relates to the implementation of that strategy.  So I think you can conclude from that comment that the President is determined to take executive action within the confines of the law before the end of the year to address and reform as many aspects of the broken immigration system as he can using his own executive authority.
But there is still a little work to be done as it relates to implementing that strategy.  So I wouldn’t say that all of the needed decisions have been made, but there have been a number of consultations between the President and members of his team, principally the Secretary of Homeland Security, Jeh Johnson, who has been responsible for leading this review alongside the Attorney General of the United States.  So there have been many conversations.  A lot of the decisions have been made.  There are still some additional decisions that need to be finalized, but what that indicates is that while there is a little bit more work to be done, most of the work has been completed and we are positioned to make an announcement about these decisions before the end of the year.
Q    All that work was supposed to have been done within 10 days from now.  So is that still on pace?  Will the President have all -- with those t’s be crossed and the i’s dotted by the end of summer?  And then the President will just hold it on his desk or in a shelf somewhere, waiting until after the election to announce it?
MR. EARNEST:  I am not under the impression that this will all be finalized next week.  I am under the impression that it will take some time to finalize some of these decisions but, again, we’re in a position where the vast majority of the work has been done.  This is something that Secretary Johnson and Attorney General Holder have been at work on for a couple of months now.  They’ve had their teams working hard at this.  There have been a number of conversations between senior White House officials and those teams.  The President has had a number of conversations about these recommendations. 
So a lot of the work here, the bulk of the work, you could even say, has been done.  There does remain a little bit more to do but that work will be completed in sufficient time for the President to make a decision and announce it before the end of the year.
Q    And one quick add.  I know Denis McDonough was on the Hill yesterday.  He had a rough reception at the Congressional Hispanic Caucus. 
MR. EARNEST:  That’s not how the meeting was described to me, but go ahead.
Q    So how would you characterize the response to the President’s delay after saying at the end of summer, now after the election, from immigration reform activists?  They’ve put out statements that have been fairly critical.  What’s your assessment of that community’s response? 
MR. EARNEST:  Well, I think they can speak for themselves.  I can speak for the President.  In terms of our -- why don’t I try to assess our relationship with them if maybe that’s an easier way for me to answer your question.
As reflected by the decision of the White House Chief of Staff to travel to Capitol Hill to sit down with members of the Congressional Hispanic Caucus, there continues to be a strong commitment by the White House to working closely with members of Congress who have, like the President, made immigration reform a top priority.
We’re going to continue to work closely with them.  We’re going to continue to work closely and consult closely with members of Congress who share this objective, and we’ll continue to have those conversations.  Yes, there are members of Congressional Hispanic Caucus, as they have made known publicly, who don’t agree with the strategy that the President has laid out. 
But that is not going to prevent the administration from continuing to work with them to accomplish the goal that we share.  It also -- again, I’ll let them speak for themselves.  The readout that I got from that meeting is that many of them were heartened by the fact that the Chief of Staff was able to reiterate to them in person that the President would make a decision, the President had decided to act, that his determination to act using his executive authority had not changed, and that he would make an announcement about those decisions before end of the year.
So it was a constructive meeting.  I’m not suggesting that everybody in there agreed with the President’s decision -- of course they don’t.  But it was a constructive meeting, and the fact that the meeting occurred is an indication of the strong relationship that endures between members of the Congressional Hispanic Caucus, other top advocates for immigration reform, and senior White House staff.
Jared.
Q    Josh, you said earlier that there are no plans at this time to send a revised AUMF to Congress.  In the 16 months between the National Defense University speech and now, what, if any, progress has been made on revising, refining or repealing the 2001 AUMF?
MR. EARNEST:  Well, Jared, I can tell you that there are obviously a number of members of Congress who have strong views on this topic, and I know that there have been some conversations that have occurred, particularly on Capitol Hill.  There have also been some conversations between senior White House staffers and members of Congress. 
Over the last 13 months, there have been a variety of other priorities that have cropped up, but this is an issue that the President has spoken about rather eloquently, and it does reflect a view that the President strongly holds.
Q    So there have been meetings at the White House?
MR. EARNEST:  I’m not going to detail all of the interactions on this topic.  But it is something that remains on the radar screen of the White House, and you’ve, I’m sure, heard from many members of Congress who continue to keep this issue on their radar screen as well.
Q    So the Iraq government is the lynchpin -- the new Iraq government, the inclusive Iraq government -- is the lynchpin in many ways of the President’s strategy.  That government is days old and potentially vulnerable.  Is there a contingency plan to defend that government if the members of that leadership are threatened by ISIS?  Is there any military contingency or other contingency if they are threatened?
MR. EARNEST:  Well, Jared, the President has already ordered military action in support of efforts by the Iraqi security forces and the Kurdish security forces.  And in the speech that the President delivered on Wednesday night, he indicated a willingness to ramp up the assistance and support that we’re providing to the Iraqi and Kurdish security forces -- this includes both strengthening and enhancing the training and equipment that is being provided to them.  It also means ramping up the kind of air support that the American military has already provided to Iraqi security forces and Kurdish security forces as they take the fight on the ground to ISIL in their country.
Q    What about contingencies for if the government is internally not solvent?  What if there’s some kind of -- again, this is something -- Abadi became Prime Minister-designate about a month ago; the government officially a couple days ago.  If this becomes something that’s not the future government of Iraq, what is our contingency plan?
MR. EARNEST:  Well, like you said, Jared, the government is just a few days old at this point.  So we’re going to continue to work closely with the Iraqi government.  It’s in the interest of the Iraqi government to work closely with this broader international coalition that’s being led by the United States to help them defend their country.
And ultimately, there is a key principle here, which is that the United States cannot take responsibility for the security situation in Iraq.  The Iraqi government, the Iraqi security forces, and, ultimately, the Iraqi people need to step up and take that responsibility.  They’ll do so with the support of the international community and the United States.  Those are very powerful friends to have, but ultimately, this is a task that they must take on themselves.
Peter.
Q    Josh, going back to the sanctions issue.  We’ve seen this in a series of increasingly tough sanctions that the U.S. and the Europeans have enacted.  But at the same time, today, we heard senior officials describing continuing, in their words, “illegal and destabilizing Russian actions in Ukraine.”  So can you point to any single impact on the military side -- not the Russian economy, which you talk about all the time -- but on the military side, that these sanctions have had to stop the Russians from illegal and destabilizing actions?
MR. EARNEST:  Well, I’ll say two things about that, but I’m going to start with the economic impact, because it’s important that people not overlook that -- that there has been a significant toll taken on the Russian economy.  It can be measured in a variety of ways -- everything from the significant sums of money that the Russian Central Bank has expended to try to prop up the Russian currency, to the tabulations of significant capital flight that we’ve seen from Russia.  Russia relies on and values the kind of international investments that’s been important to their economy.  We’ve actually seen that private capital flowing in the other direction because Russia has become increasingly isolated.
The Russian financial markets are not performing at the same level as comparable economies.  And we have seen international organizations roll back their projections for Russian economic growth in the future because of the sanctions that have been put in place.  So there has been a tangible economic effect.  The question you’re asking, though, is a legitimate one, which is --
Q    Does that translate into anything that has impacted at all on the military side?
MR. EARNEST:  I would say that in two ways, that there has been an impact.  The first is that, as Ukraine was engaged in an effort to elect a new President, Vladimir Putin, the President of Russia, was vowing to not acknowledge the results of that election, but yet, just a couple of weeks ago, Vladimir Putin traveled to Minsk to sit down across the negotiating table from that newly -- relatively newly elected President of Ukraine.  That has been a pretty dramatic reversal, as it relates to the position of Russia and the elected leader of Ukraine.
The second thing is -- and in some ways this might be more important -- we have seen early indications that Russia is living up to the cease-fire agreement that was reached just last week, and that involves some troop movements and some other things.  We have also seen those kinds of encouraging signs be quickly reversed.  So I don’t want to be irrationally exuberant about those early indications, but yet, they are an indication that -- at least preliminarily, that Russia is living up to aspects of that cease-fire agreement.
But I think the other -- this is the last thing I’ll say about your question -- there are other things that we want Russia to do, and we believe that they should do, to demonstrate their respect for Ukraine’s territorial integrity, and to demonstrate their respect for basic international norms about the sovereignty of other countries.
So I think everybody who has participated in the effort to impose sanctions on Russia would acknowledge that there is more that needs to be done by Russia.  And that, by definition almost, means that Russia hasn’t -- that the sanctions haven’t yet had the desired effect.
But the United States, in coordination with our allies, has spoken pretty clearly with a united voice about the need for Russia to live up to these basic international commitments and international norms.  And the international community -- the United States included -- is prepared to start to roll back these sanctions if we see Russia start to live up to the kinds of agreements that they have made.
Q    You mentioned Putin.  Does the President trust him on any level?
MR. EARNEST:  Well, the President himself has described the kinds of conversations and the relationship that he has with President Putin I believe as “businesslike.”  And I do think that is the kind of give-and-take that they have with one another; that the President is able to speak pretty bluntly with President Putin, and I believe that President Putin feels like he can speak pretty bluntly in return.  That is a useful and constructive channel of dialogue between those two world leaders. 
There are, despite our differences -- our strong differences -- with Russia about their behavior in Ukraine, there are other areas where we have been able to advance both of our nations’ interests on some other topics.  The P5-plus-1 negotiations in Iran is probably the best example of that -- actually, the best example of that is probably the removal of Syria’s declared chemical weapons stockpile.  That was something --
Q    I don’t think you answered the question, though.  Does he trust Putin?
MR. EARNEST:  Well, I think what I’m trying to say, Peter, is that they do have a very businesslike exchange of ideas when they talk.  And their relationship -- or the relationship between the two countries has yielded results that are positive for the United States and positive for Russia.  That is an indication of at least a functioning relationship between our two countries.  And that’s an indication that you have two world leaders who are able to interact in a constructive way.
Let’s see.  Josh.  How are you?
Q    I’m good.  How are you?
MR. EARNEST:  Good.  Thank you.
Q    Can I follow up on Jim’s question about the comparison to a year ago and the resolution?  At that time, not only did the President say in his public remarks that he wanted Congress to have a vote -- I don’t know if he said up or down, but some kind of a direct vote -- on the use of military force in that context, the White House actually sent a draft resolution to Capitol Hill, which I think Senator Mendendez or Senator Reid introduced to be considered.  Events moved on, that didn’t happen.  Why is the stance different now?  Isn’t this in fact a more significant undertaking than a couple of -- what was reported to be a couple of nights of bombing of Syria versus what aids are indicating could be a two-year campaign, a three-year campaign against ISIL?
MR. EARNEST:  I’ll say a couple things about that.  I don’t, frankly, recall the provision of the working draft of a resolution, but I take your word for it.  I don’t recall that.  I do have the President’s language in front of me:  “I look forward to engaging Congress and the American people in efforts to refine and ultimately repeal the AUMF’s mandate, and I will not sign laws designed to expand this mandate further.  Our systematic effort to dismantle terrorist organizations must continue.”
Q    Yes, I’m not talking about that speech.  I’m talking about the Syria chemical weapons situation from just a year ago --
MR. EARNEST:  I see.
Q    -- where he said we should have an up-or-down vote, and -- why isn’t he using that language in connection with this new effort that seems broader?
MR. EARNEST:  I see.  Because they’re two different situations.  The President, in this case, believes that he does have the authority that he needs under the statutory authority, under the 2001 AUMF to carry out the military actions that he has ordered thus far.  Those actions, again, would not include the deployment of ground combat troops into Iraq or Syria, and all of this would take place under the rubric of a broader international coalition.
The situation last year was different.  The goal here is to deny a safe haven to ISIL, and to degrade and ultimately destroy them.  The situation that we were talking about a little over a year ago was related to the Assad regime’s use of chemical weapons.  And those are just two different circumstances.
Q    But he did say in his speech a year ago that he thought he had the authority there, too, to do what he needed to do, but nevertheless he wanted a resolution from Congress.  And if there are differences between this situation and that, don’t they lean in favor of getting Congress more clearly on the record in this case?  Because you’re talking about a much more massive undertaking.  It’s not really a question of whether the law requires him to do it; he said it’s healthy when Congress is explicit about these things and supporting him.  Isn’t it even more important in this case?
MR. EARNEST:  Well, I think this is exactly why the administration would welcome a show of support from Congress for the strategy that the President has put in place here.  There is, in the view of the President, a very clear national security interest about why the President has ordered the military action that he has, and we would certainly welcome a show of support from Congress.
At the same time, the President and his national security team have determined that it’s -- that he has very clearly the authority that he needs under the previous AUMF to order that military action.
Jon.
Q    So, Josh -- just to follow up on -- isn’t it true that the President would like a vote from Congress on this, just as Josh was just asking about -- just like he wanted a year ago?  And the reason why he is not explicitly asking for a vote -- although he’s certainly implying it with that sentence you just read -- is that congressional leaders, Democratic congressional leaders, have said they don’t want a vote right now -- isn’t that what’s really going on here?
MR. EARNEST:  Jon, what’s going on is that the President believes he has the authorization that he needs.
Q    As he did a year ago.
MR. EARNEST:  And in this case, he has -- for the reasons that I described earlier to your colleague’s question, about why he has the authority that he needs under the 2001 AUMF.  And I think the President has taken the reasonable position that’s consistent with the policy that he laid out in his speech at the National Defense University a little over a year ago -- has said that he would welcome a show of support from Congress for the strategy that the President has put forward. 
And I think that is the reasonable position that the President has pursued.  And this is a position that the President and his national security team have discussed at length with members of Congress in both parties who are interested in this issue.
Q    So let’s put that in language that Congress -- describes what Congress actually does, shows of support and not a technical term of a congressional action here.  The President would welcome a vote from Congress explicitly authorizing this, is that correct?  Would he welcome such a vote?
MR. EARNEST:  Well, it is true, Jon, that there are a range of ways that Congress could indicate their support.  That would include a vote, and that would include the range of things that the President would welcome.
The President does not, however, believe that that’s what he needs.  What he needs right now is the specific Title 10 authority related to the training-and-equipping mission of the -- that he would like the Department of Defense to carry out to expand the capacity and strengthen the capacity of the Syrian opposition.
Q    And Bill Clinton was here today, I believe I saw on the South Lawn. 
MR. EARNEST:  I noticed.  Always nice to have him back, isn’t it?
Q    Sure thing.  Did the President have some time to sit down with the former President?
MR. EARNEST:  I do understand that they were going to visit a little bit before the event.  I don’t know that they were going to have a formal meeting of any kind, but I was not -- I did not -- unfortunately, I didn’t have the opportunity to see the former President while he was here.  But I would anticipate that they had a chance to visit a little bit before the event.
Q    Because I know the President reached out to former National Security Advisors for some counsel and their views on the situation with the Islamic State.  So has the President similarly reached out to former President Clinton or former Secretary of State Clinton for their views on how to handle this threat?
MR. EARNEST:  Well, like I said, Jon, I’m not sure of the nature of the conversation that they had today.  Even if I were aware of it --
Q    Even other days.  I mean, has there been any --
MR. EARNEST:  -- I’m not in a position to read out any sort of -- any conversations between the President and his predecessors.
Michelle.
Q    The administration hasn’t wanted to call this a war on ISIS, but is it not a war?
MR. EARNEST:  Well, that’s a good question, Michelle.  There are a couple things that I would say about that.  I mean, the first thing that’s important for people to understand is the President has made clear how the strategy that he is pursuing in Iraq and Syria to degrade and ultimately destroy ISIL is different than the strategy that was pursued in the previous Iraq war. 
The President has been clear that American ground combat troops would not be deployed into Iraq and Syria.  The President has indicated how serious he is about building a true international coalition, where you will have governments in the region and our allies around the world contributing to this broader effort to deny ISIL a safe haven in Iraq and Syria.
Q    But that happens in wars as well.
MR. EARNEST:  Well, but this is -- the reason that I say this again is, as the President and Secretary Kerry have described, this is consistent with the counterterrorism strategy that this administration has successfully implemented in a variety of other places around the globe.  The question that you’re asking, though, goes to sort of the central question that is important for people to understand. 
This is not a situation where it’s the United States against ISIL.  The fact is, ISIL has indicated that they’re ready to go to war against the world.  And this President, as is expected of American Presidents, is stepping up to lead an international coalition to confront that threat and to deny ISIL a safe haven.  And ultimately this international coalition will be responsible for degrading and destroying ISIL.  So I think what you could conclude from this is the United States is at war with ISIL in the same way that we are at war with al Qaeda and its al Qaeda affiliates all around the globe.
Q    Got it.  And in Syria, we know now that it was sort of strange the way it came up but the Assad regime is saying that it would help in the effort to defeat ISIS in Syria but any unilateral action by the United States would be seen as aggression.  So now U.S.-trained fighters -- I mean, there’s a big risk that Assad’s forces will just double down and be fighting them while they’re trying to fight ISIS, right?
MR. EARNEST:  Well, we’ve seen that they’ve been doing that already.  And that is why the United States is looking to ramp up the assistance that we provide to Syrian opposition fighters to give them greater capacity to take on ISIL.  And they will have, and what will impact the equation if not change it completely, is they will have the backing of the United States military in the form of military airstrikes working alongside them and coordinating with them as they attempt to take the fight to ISIL on the ground in their own country.
Q    But indirectly, these U.S. forces are going to be training them to not only fight ISIS but they’re also going to be having to simultaneously fight Assad forces.  I mean, it’s not as if that’s unexpected, but that’s what they’re going to be trained to do, yes?
MR. EARNEST:  As many of you have noted, we have a longstanding policy as relates to the Assad regime.  We believe that President Assad has lost legitimacy to lead that country.  But what we’re focused on and what this international coalition is focused on is confronting the threat that’s posed by ISIL and making sure that the international community can act and support the Syrian fighters on the ground to deny ISIL a safe haven in Syria.
It’s important for people to understand that the failed leadership of President Assad is the reason that we’re in this situation.  The reason that ISIL has a safe haven in Syria today is because of the failure of President Assad to lead that country in a way that would unite that country to meet the threat that’s posed by ISIL. 
So the international community is being forced to step in here.  We’re going to support the opposition fighters, we’re going to build this broader international coalition.  These Syrian opposition fighters will be backed up with military support and air support from the United States, and potentially other members of the coalition.  And that will certainly enhance their capacity and their ability to take the fight to ISIL on the ground in their own country.
Q    Okay, and very quickly, just because we heard late last night from Jim Foley’s mother saying a lot of things.  But one of the things that sort of stuck out was saying that the U.S. government told the family that they shouldn’t raise a ransom.  And we know the U.S. stance on paying ransoms in general, but she said that she was told that the family would be prosecuted if they tried to do that on their own.  Did the government tell them that?  And if so, why?
MR. EARNEST:  Well, Michelle, let me start out by saying something that I’ve said before but it continues to be true today, which is the thoughts and prayers of everyone here at the White House are with the Foley family.  The grief that they’re experiencing right now is unthinkable and the sadness that they must be feeling is devastating.  And our thoughts and prayers are with them in this very difficult time. 
The President is very concerned about Americans who are in a situation where they have been taken hostage by violent extremists and there are a number of examples of the President using every tool at our disposal to try to secure the release and safe return of those individuals.  That was true in the case of Mr. Foley as well. 
The United States was in contact with more than two dozen countries to try to gather information or intelligence that could lead to the rescue of Mr. Foley.  Representatives from across the government, including the FBI, the intelligence community, the State Department, and even officials here at the White House were in regular touch with the Foley family to provide them updates about the situation and to communicate to them that his return and his rescue continued to be a priority of this administration.
The other thing that I will say is that the President was so convinced that this was a priority that he ordered a high-risk mission that was successfully executed to try to secure the release and rescue of Mr. Foley.  Unfortunately, and despite the way in which that mission was executed -- that is to say, successfully -- it did not end in the release of Mr. Foley.  But it is an indication that elements of the U.S. government were willing to take a significant risk and expend significant resources to secure his release.
Q    Did the U.S. tell them that they would be prosecuted if they tried to raise a ransom?
MR. EARNEST:  Michelle, I’m not going to be in a position to detail the kinds of conversations that took place so often between members of the administration and the Foley family.  It is the longstanding policy of this administration, it was the policy of previous administrations that ransoms should not be paid to terrorist organizations.  We have found that terrorist organizations use hostage-taking and ransoms as a critical source of financing for their organization, and that paying ransoms only puts other Americans in a position where they’re at even greater risk.  So it is the policy of this administration, and it’s consistent with the policy that was in place in other administrations as well.
Q    But theoretically, if someone did pay a ransom to ISIS to get their loved one back, would the U.S. government try to prosecute that person?
MR. EARNEST:  Well, Michelle, I’d refer you to the Department of Justice about how that law is implemented.  But it is -- we’ve been very clear about what our policy is and we’ve been clear that that policy is in place both to try to prevent extremist organizations from having access to regular sources of funding but also to try to enhance the safety of American citizens around the globe.
Wendell.
Q    In the effort to defeat ISIS, would the U.S. conduct an attack that had the indirect effect of aiding Bashar al-Assad?
MR. EARNEST:  Wendell, that is a -- our actions in Syria are taking place, or would take place, in the midst of a rather difficult situation in Syria.  There are a lot of different factions that are on the ground there. 
But the policy that this administration has put in place has very clear guidelines.  Our priority is to deny ISIL a safe haven from which they could plot and execute a significant terrorist attack against the West, including the U.S. homeland.  That is a -- Osama bin Laden exposed how dangerous it is for a terrorist organization to have a safe haven, and this President has indicated that it is a clear principle of his presidency that he will take action to deny a safe haven to those organizations that seek to do harm to the United States.
Q    Is part of the policy also, don’t help Assad?
MR. EARNEST:  Part of our policy is also that we believe that President Assad has the legitimacy to lead his country.  And as I mentioned to Michelle, it is our view -- and I think this is pretty clear -- that the consequence, the clear consequence of President Assad’s failed leadership and failed governance is the kind of vacuum that ISIL has stepped into and filled with their brand of violent, despicable extremism.
And it is only because of that failed leadership on the part of President Assad that ISIL is in a position to try to capitalize on a virtual safe haven in Syria that would allow them to expand their scope and potentially do the necessary planning and plotting to strike the U.S. homeland.  The President is determined to use every element of American power to make sure that that doesn’t happen.
Q    And is the idea that we’re not in a war with ISIS or ISIL aimed at American voters, or potential Middle East allies, or congressional representatives who say the President needs to go to them for authorization?  Is it aimed at any of those people?
MR. EARNEST:  Well, Wendell, I think what our aim here is, is to be as clear as possible about our strategy.  And the strategy that this administration has put in place is a counterterrorism strategy that has been successful in other areas where there are extremist groups seeking a safe haven to do harm to the United States of America.
So the United States -- this counterterrorism strategy includes building up the capacity of local forces to take the fight to these extremist groups on the ground in their country.  This strategy includes the deployment of American military assets, principally airstrikes that could be used in support of those ground forces to aid their effort to take the fight to these extremist organizations.  And it includes building the kind of international coalition that can powerfully support local governments and national governments as they take the fight to these extremist organizations.  This is a strategy --
Q    But it’s not a war.
MR. EARNEST:  This is a strategy that’s worked in other places, and it’s a strategy that we anticipate will be successful in Iraq and in Syria.  Let me just be clear about this:  what the President has said is that this is not a situation of ISIL against the United States. 
ISIL is waging a war against the broader international community.  And the President is determined to build and lead an international coalition to take the fight to them.  So in the same way that the United States is at war with al Qaeda and its affiliates around the globe, the United States is at war with ISIL.
Mike.
Q    Yes, sir.  Two questions.  First, in a very general sense, does the President as a constitutional scholar believe that the War Powers Act is constitutional?
MR. EARNEST:  The President is a constitutional scholar; I am not.  And so I would be hesitant to sort of opine on the legal merits and strengths and weaknesses of a particular --
Q    I’m not asking you to.  I’m asking if the President believes that it is.
MR. EARNEST:  I haven’t had that conversation with him so it would be hard for me to talk about that from here. 
I will say that the administration has repeatedly demonstrated our willingness to comply with the requirements of the war powers report -- or the War Powers Act.  We have filed numerous war power reports with Congress related to the movement of troops and military activities.
Q    But that doesn’t start any sort of clock for congressional action.  I believe a notification would start a 60-day clock.
*MR. EARNEST:  And there are a number of notifications that have been filed in the context of the current conflict in [Iraq]Syria.  Again, that was related to some ground troops that have been deployed specifically to strengthen protections of the embassy, to serve in the joint operation centers with Iraqi security forces, and some forces that are related to an advise-and-assist mission.
But let me get to this other part of it, which is that -- so we have demonstrated a willingness to comply with the requirements of the War Powers Act.  That said, as we enter this next phase of the conflict, this more offensive phase of the conflict, as the President described it, the President believes he has the statutory authority that he needs to order military operations to deny ISIL a safe haven, and ultimately destroy that organization.
Q    One more piece of statutory authority that he needs is Title 10 authority.
MR. EARNEST:  That’s correct, and that’s a priority.
Q    Is that a precondition for expanding the air campaign into Syria?
MR. EARNEST:  Well, no.  It is a core component that compliments this element of our strategy.
We’ve indicated -- or at least -- we haven’t indicated -- Democrats and Republicans on Capitol Hill have indicated that they support giving the administration this authority.  I believe somebody asked me yesterday if the completion of the training mission of Syrian fighters would be required before the President would authorize airstrikes in Syria, or begin to carry out airstrikes in Syria.  And what the President has said is that he’s still reviewing the materials that have been prepared for him by the Department of Defense, but that he is ready and prepared to act but will do so at a time and place of our choosing.  And it’s unlikely that’s something that we would announce too far in advance.
Q    But that brings us back to -- the central question is, assuming that the campaign is successful in pushing them back from the Syrian strongholds, if that moderate vetted opposition, as the administration terms it, is not trained to move into that space, who moves into that space?
MR. EARNEST:  Well, it certainly won’t be U.S. ground combat troops.  That’s for sure.  There are elements of the Syrian opposition that have already been receiving both military and non-military assistance from the United States for more than a year now.
It’s been widely reported that there are other regional governments that have been seeking to assist the -- or offer assistance to the Syrian opposition.  But ultimately, the responsibility for taking the fight to ISIL on the ground in Syria can and should be Syrian fighters.  And the question is, what kind of support can we offer them?  And in the President’s view, the international community can provide support to them in two ways.
One is ramping up our training and equipping mission.  And two is the deployment of American and allied airstrikes in support of their efforts on the ground; that that will have an impact, and alter the equation on the ground as they take the fight to ISIL in their country.
Chris.
Q    Thanks, Josh.  I just want to clarify what you said about the distinction between counterterrorism and war because earlier today, Rear Admiral John Kirby at the Pentagon briefing said something almost identical to what you said -- I’m going to quote him -- “This is not the Iraq war of 2002, but make no mistake, we know we are at war with ISIL in the same way we are at war and continue to be at war with al Qaeda and its affiliates.”  Can you speak to, since it seems to be almost direct wording, is this a message from the administration that we are at war with ISIL or ISIS?  Semantics do seem to matter here.
MR. EARNEST:  Semantics matter in our line of work, both yours and mine, Chris.  And I think what -- Admiral Kirby’s comments are an indication that the administration at the Department of Defense, here at the White House, and I expect that my colleagues at other agencies will be asked as well, it is important for people here in the United States and around the world to understand that the strategy that the United States is pursuing at the direct order of the President of the United States is different than the strategy that was previously pursued in Iraq. 
We are not contemplating a significant commitment of ground troops to Iraq.  We’re certainly not contemplating the deployment of ground troops into combat in Iraq or in Syria.  But the strategy that we’ve laid out is consistent with the counterterrorism strategy that we’ve pursued in places all around the globe.
And our intention and our determination to build an international coalition to degrade and ultimately defeat ISIL is a top national security priority of the United States.  That’s because it’s in line with a core principle the President has laid out to deny ISIL and other terrorist organizations that seek to do harm to the United States a safe haven anywhere in the world.
And so in the same way that we are at war with al Qaeda and its affiliates around the globe, we are at war with ISIL.  But make no mistake, when I say “we,” I’m not talking just about the United States.  I’m talking about this broader international coalition that includes Sunni-led governments in the region and our allies around the world who are united in confronting this threat.
Q    So the definition of war does not need to include ground troops?
MR. EARNEST:  Well, I’ll let other people determine what the precise legal or academic definition of war may be.  What it’s important for people to understand -- setting aside the specific definition -- is, A, how this strategy is significantly different than the strategy that was pursued in the previous Iraq war; B, they need to understand that we’re talking about a broad international coalition; C, they need to understand that this is consistent with the counterterrorism strategy that the President has employed in other places in a way that has made the American people safer; and, D, they need to understand that this strategy is one that is being pursued not just by the United States alone, but by a broad international coalition that's being led by the United States of America.
Q    And in believing that and in deciding that the AUMF covered this latest round, did the Justice Department provide a written analysis for the President, a legal analysis?
MR. EARNEST:  I’ll be honest with you, Chris, I don't know the answer to that question.  You should check with the Department of Justice.  I mean, I will say that even if they have, I don't know if they’d be in a position to provide private legal advice to the President, to the public.  But you should check with them and find out.
Q    And if I can ask another question to follow up on what Michelle was asking about the Foley family because -- and this concern that they had that they said that they were told by the government that they would be prosecuted if they tried to raise a ransom.  You stated, as you’ve stated many times before, that it is the policy of the U.S. government not to pay ransom.  But you referred us and said, “how that law is implemented, you should check with Justice.”  Obviously there is a difference between policy and law.  Is there a law that suggests that someone could be prosecuted if they paid ransom to what the United States might deem a terrorist organization?
MR. EARNEST:  I think what I was trying to clarify is I can speak to our policy, and our policy for a good reason, and for a reason that involves the safety and well-being of Americans across the globe, is that we do not pay ransom to terrorist organizations that take hostages.
But as it relates to the law, I’d refer you to my colleagues the Department of Justice.  It’s their responsibility to understand what the laws are and how they're enforced.  I can't speak to that from here.
Q    Well, would it have been the Justice Department folks who spoke with the Foley family about this issue?
MR. EARNEST:  I do believe that there were some Justice Department officials who were in touch with the Foley family.  But I can't speak to the nature of their conversations.
Q    The Foleys said -- the Foley family says the military officials told them of this.
MR. EARNEST:  Well, again, I’m not going to get into who said what in the context of these individual conversations.  As I described earlier, there were a range of officials in the administration who were in touch with the Foley family.  It was the Department of Defense, the Department of Justice, the FBI, and even some officials here at the White House.  But I’m not going to detail the nature of those conversations.
Q    They said specifically military officials warned them of prosecution if they paid ransom money.
MR. EARNEST:  Again, Wendell, I’m not going to detail the specific conversations that they may have had.  I will observe, however, that the large number of conversations that were -- that occurred between a variety of officials here in this administration is indicative of the resources that were dedicated to trying to secure the safe return of Mr. Foley.
Q    Thanks, Josh.
MR. EARNEST:  Lalit.
Q    Thanks, Josh.  In Afghanistan, the auditing of ballots is over.  And in Kabul today, supporters of Abdullah Abdullah, one of the presidential candidates, had a large demonstration in which they alleged that the U.N. and the U.S. helped in rigging of votes in the presidential election.  My question is, to what extent are you hopeful that there will be a stable, unity government in Afghanistan, given the two candidates are still fighting among each other?
MR. EARNEST:  Well, Lalit, as you know, the President spoke with Afghan presidential candidates Dr. Abdullah Abdullah and Dr. Ashraf Ghani on Saturday.  He emphasized the importance of concluding a deal on the national unity government as soon as possible, in the interest of shoring up international support for Afghanistan and for preserving Afghan stability.  The President reaffirmed the United States’ commitment to support Afghanistan, its people, and efforts to form a new unity government. 
In addition to the President’s conversations, the United States is continuing to engage with the candidates at the highest levels, including Secretary Kerry and Ambassador Cunningham, both of whom have been intensively involved in the situation.
Everyone across the United States government that's been speaking to both candidates has encouraged them to abide by their commitments to the political process and to the formation of a unity government that helps secure the prosperity and stability of Afghanistan.  That's been our policy for some time.  That's been the policy that's been communicated by the President to them.  The President has had a number of telephone conversations with them throughout this process. 
And our policy hasn’t changed.  They’ve made specific commitments to a political process and to the formation of a national unity government.  And despite the challenging situation that they're operating in right now, we expect them to uphold the commitments that they’ve made because it’s in the best interests of their country and their people.
Q    And if there is no unity government, what impact would it have in terms of U.S. financial and military assistance to Afghanistan?
MR. EARNEST:  Well, the key thing here, as everybody knows, is the signing of a bilateral security agreement.  Both of these candidates have indicated a willingness to sign that agreement, but we’ll need the President of Afghanistan and the senior members of the government to sign on and officially agree to that bilateral security agreement.  So that's what we’re watching.
I think there are a host of other organizations that are watching to see what sort of security agreement Afghanistan has with the United States.  And I do think that that will have an impact on the decisions that international organizations in other countries make about the presence they’ll have in Afghanistan.  And that's why it’s so important for these candidates to keep the commitments that they’ve made to the political process -- because it is important to shoring up international support for Afghanistan and preserving Afghan stability.
Cheryl, I’ll give you the last one, then we’ll do the week ahead.
Q    Thanks.  Real quick, I just wanted to know about the status of funding for the southwest border.  I don't believe there’s any new funding in the CR.  So I’m wondering if that's something you’re going to look for later?  Or if that need has been -- I don't know -- abated.
MR. EARNEST:  Well, we have seen that the situation at the southwest border has significantly improved since the President announced some steps earlier this summer to deal with that challenge.  Those steps included shifting additional resources from the interior of the country to the border.  There are a number of intensive diplomatic efforts underway with Mexico and with countries in Central America where these -- many of those seeking to travel to this country originated. 
So there was also a strategy that was put in place to open up detention centers, to hire additional judges and prosecutors and asylum specialists to preside over and participate in the proceedings that were related to processing these cases.
So there was a lot of work that went into trying to deal with this flow.  And the situation is much better.  It’s ironic that you asked me about this -- the last couple of days I’ve actually brought slides in to illustrate this situation.  And of course, today I said, no, don't worry about the slides anymore, no one has asked about those in two days.  So maybe on Monday somebody can ask me about it and I can -- wouldn’t you like to see?  Look, I’m not even exaggerating it.  There’s even a little PowerPoint thing that they gave.  But no one had ever -- no one had asked.  So we’ll do that on Monday.  That's something to look forward to on Monday.
Q    Week ahead, Josh. 
MR. EARNEST:  But the point is that there are additional resources that the government would like to deal with --
Q    Thank you.  (Laughter.)
MR. EARNEST:  There are additional resources that we would like.  Congress has thus far failed to provide them.  But we certainly would like to see additional resources to deal with this challenge.
Q    Josh, one more, please?
Q    Week ahead.
MR. EARNEST:  I think we’re just going to go to the week ahead, Goyal. 
On Monday the President will award the Medal of Honor to Army Command Sergeant Major Bennie G. Adkins and to Army Specialist Four Donald P. Sloat for conspicuous gallantry. 
In the evening, the President will attend a DSCC event in Washington, D.C.
As I mentioned at the beginning of the briefing, the President will travel to Atlanta, Georgia to visit the headquarters of the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention, where he’ll receive a briefing on the outbreak of the Ebola virus in West Africa, discuss the U.S. response, and thank the scientists, doctors and health care workers helping those affected by the disease at home and around the world.
The President will also receive a briefing while he’s there on the respiratory illness reported in several states in the Midwest.  That evening, the President will travel to Tampa, Florida where he’ll remain overnight. 
On Wednesday, the President will visit U.S. Central Command at MacDill Air Force Base in Tampa.  And we talked through the things that he’ll do there.
On Wednesday evening, the President will return to the White House where he’ll host a picnic for members of Congress.  That should be interesting.  (Laughter.)
On Thursday, the President will --
Q    Is that the annual one?
MR. EARNEST:  That is the annual.  That is the annual one.  So -- this is something that we’ve traditionally done in the summertime.  We moved it to the fall to make it -- there were a couple of times, you’ll recall, earlier in the administration where we canceled the picnic because it was so hot outside.  So we decided we’d move it to a time when the weather might cooperate a little better.
On Thursday morning, the President will participate in an ambassador credentialing ceremony in the Oval Office.  At this event, the President will receive the credentials from foreign ambassadors recently posted in Washington.  The presentation of credentials is a traditional ceremony that marks the formal beginning of an ambassador’s service in Washington.
In the afternoon, the President will host President Petro Poroshenko of Ukraine at the White House.  The visit will highlight the United States’ firm commitment to stand with the Ukraine as it pursues democracy, independence and stability.  President Obama looks forward to discussing with President Poroshenko efforts to pursue a diplomatic resolution to the crisis in eastern Ukraine, as well as our continued support for Ukraine’s struggle to defend its sovereignty and territorial integrity.
That evening, Thursday evening, the President will attend a DNC event in Washington, D.C.
And then on Friday, the President will wrap up a very busy week by participating in an event with the DNC’s Women’s Leadership Forum here in Washington, D.C.
With that, I wish you all a good weekend.
END

	2:34 P.M. EDT
The White House
Office of the Press Secretary
James S. Brady Press Briefing Room
12:03 P.M. EDT
MR. EARNEST:  Happy Monday, everybody.  Hopefully, the rest of the briefing will be characterized by more effective communication between the White House and the Press Corps than the two-minute warning was.
Julie, why don’t you go ahead and get us started today?
Q    Sounds good.  Thanks.  I had a couple questions on the administration’s response to Islamic State, starting with the conversations you’re having on the Hill on the Title 10 authority.  First of all, if you could read out any conversations the President might be having with lawmakers over the weekend.  Last week, there were a lot of briefings for the Hill.  Are there more of those?  And do you feel like you’re making progress in getting the Hill to include Title 10 in the CR?
MR. EARNEST:  I think the best way to evaluate this actually may be to review the public statements from members of Congress as it relates to this Title 10 authority.  We’ve seen public statements from Democrats and Republicans in senior positions, both in the House and the Senate, indicate that they support giving the administration the necessary authority to ramp up our assistance to the Syrian opposition by training and equipping them.  So we’re gratified by that show of bipartisan public support for this urgent priority.
There have been a number of conversations between senior administration officials, Cabinet officials, senior White House officials and members of Congress on this issue.  The President has made a number of phone calls on this over the course of the last week, and I would anticipate that he’ll be in touch with additional members of Congress in advance of the votes this week.
What I will -- I don’t know of any additional briefings that have been scheduled, but there were all-member briefings that were scheduled last week.  So every member, even if they’re not on the docket for a briefing this week, has received one in the last week.  And I’m confident that if there are members of Congress that do have questions about the kind of authority or what this program would entail, that there would be a senior administration official that would be happy to discuss with them.
As I mentioned, we believe that this is a priority -- or I should restate that we believe this is a priority because what we have seen from our partners in the region is a willingness to join with us in this effort.  And the President believes it’s important to strike while the iron is hot here and begin to ramp up this program as soon as possible, particularly now that we have willing commitments from regional governments whose cooperation is essential to this program’s success.
Q    Can you give us a sense of what the Title 10 authority would include, and some more specifics?  What type of weaponry you’re looking to give to the Syrian rebels?  How many U.S. personnel would be involved in this training mission in Saudi Arabia?
MR. EARNEST:  I don’t have a lot of those details in front of me.  The Department of Defense may be able to provide you some additional information.  The goal here is to ensure that we have -- or that there is a fighting force on the ground in Syria that can take the fight to ISIL in Syria.  The President has ruled out the use of American combat troops for that purpose. 
So the alternative is to enhance the capacity and capability of Syrian opposition fighters so that they can take the fight to ISIL in their own country.  And we do have willing partners.  Saudi Arabia, as you know, has already announced a willingness to host some of these training operations, at least.  And this administration wants to work closely with regional governments and other allies who have made commitments to assist in this effort.  And so we’re eager to get this program up and running, and that’s why we are hoping and pleased to see bipartisan support for giving the administration this authority before the end of the week.
Q    And if I can move on to the efforts to form a coalition.  There have been certainly statements of support from countries in Europe and in the Middle East for a broad effort, but very few details about what these countries are willing to commit.  U.S. officials talk vaguely about this, but we don’t really have any specifics.  Do you have specific commitments from countries for action, not just a broad statement, of support for what the U.S. is going to do?
MR. EARNEST:  Julie, there have been intensive diplomatic conversations between senior administration officials and our counterparts in the region but also across the globe.  The President was gratified, as he reported at the end of the NATO Summit, by the response that he got from the leaders of Allied nations signaling their willingness and support for the effort to combat ISIL.
Since then, Secretary Kerry has been traveling in the region, and was just in Paris over the weekend meeting with his counterparts from some of these regional partners and allies to discuss commitments that they’re prepared to make to this effort.
The thing that’s important to understand is that we want to try and do this in an integrated way that is as efficient as possible; that we don’t just sort of want people to announce one-off commitments without making sure that they are announcing those commitments in a coordinated way -- that we want to make sure that we have all the boxes checked in terms of what our needs are.  And part of what the United States is doing in terms of leading this coalition is assessing what contributions are necessary.  And then this will be a role for General Allen to play, is to match up those needs with the capacity and willingness of partners to fill those needs.
So this isn’t just a matter of getting people to issue a news release or make some other kind of public commitment to do something.  We want to make sure that their commitment matches what’s actually needed and that we’re not duplicating efforts, and that the country that is in the best position to fulfill a specific need is the one that actually follows through and fills that need.
So a lot of this is de-conflicting, making sure that we’re not doubling up on specific requests and letting some requests go unfilled.  So we’re trying to do this in a systematic, integrated way.  This will be the responsibility of General Allen, who’s meeting with the President tomorrow to update him on this process. 
So there are no specific public commitments for me to make from here right now, but I do anticipate that based on the favorable response that Secretary Kerry and others are receiving from our allies in these discussions, that we will at some point be able to announce important commitments from our allies and from regional governments who, as we’ve said before, in some ways have an even greater stake in the outcome of this conflict than we do.
Q    I asked you this last week, and I’m wondering if now that Secretary Kerry and others have had conversations over the last couple days, if you can say more definitively -- will the U.S. be launching airstrikes alone, or are there other countries who will be launching airstrikes alongside the U.S.?
MR. EARNEST:  Well, when we are in a position to be more specific about the commitments that we’ve received from our allies and other interested regional governments, then we will do that.
Q    But you can’t even say broadly that, yes, there are other countries who will launch airstrikes alongside the U.S.?
MR. EARNEST:  Well, I think the natural follow-up to that question would be, well, tell me who.  And so we want to make --
Q    -- the first one --
MR. EARNEST:  And so my point is that we’re not going to be in a position of making these kinds of commitments for people.  It will be much more -- it will carry much more weight if you have a senior official from another country saying what their country is prepared to do in support of this allied effort, as opposed to me speaking for other countries.  I’m just not going to put myself in that position.  And frankly, it will have greater credibility when it is announced by that country for you to get a sense of what kinds of contributions we’re getting from other interested parties here.
So we are pleased with the progress that’s been made so far in terms of the reaction we’ve gotten in the context of these conversations.  General Allen is somebody who will draw upon his military expertise, but in this case is fulfilling a strictly diplomatic function in terms of coordinating with governments in the region and around the world to assess how they can contribute militarily to this broader effort.  And he is hard at work on this already; he will brief the President on the status of these efforts tomorrow.  And I know others have talked about the importance of the upcoming United Nations General Assembly meeting as an appropriate venue for us to have additional discussions on these topics.  So stay tuned.
Jeff.
Q    Josh, ahead of the President’s trip tomorrow, can you tell us a little bit more about the administration’s plan to fight Ebola, and to what extent the President is concerned about that becoming a crisis in this country?
MR. EARNEST:  Well, Jeff, the President’s visit to the CDC tomorrow underscores just how extraordinarily serious the administration believes this issue is.  The President has identified it as a top national security priority, and he looks forward to receiving an update from the experts at the CDC about the success of their efforts so far to try to confront this problem. 
As you know, this is one of the worst, if not the worst, outbreak of Ebola that we’ve ever seen.  The CDC has responded commensurate with the seriousness of the situation.  They have already deployed a number of personnel to the region.  I think it’s -- I’m looking through my notes here -- about 100 of its workers to the region.  This is if not the largest, among the largest deployments of CDC personnel ever.
The administration has already committed more than $100 million to address the Ebola outbreak, and this has taken a variety of forms, but includes commitments from USAID, from the CDC and others to try to meet some of these needs.  We’ve also seen the Department of Defense step forward and make some commitments as it relates to the expertise they have when it comes to logistics.  And this is all part of the whole-of-government approach that the President has directed in response to this situation.
I’d point out that while this story has -- rightly so -- entered the headlines over the course of the last four or six weeks, the fact is this outbreak first started back in March, and the CDC and other government agencies were closely working with our international partners to confront that threat even back then.  So this is something that we’ve been focused on for quite some time.  The President is looking forward to the briefing that he’ll receive tomorrow, and I would anticipate the announcement of additional efforts that will be underway or that the United States can deploy to address this situation in the context of the President’s visit tomorrow.  But I don't have anything new in terms of specific announcements to offer up from here today.
Q    To what extent does he view Ebola as being a threat to the United States?
MR. EARNEST:  The President talked about this in the “Meet the Press” interview that he did 10 days or so ago.  He identified it as a top national security priority.
And his concern is that making an investment here early is critical to trying to snuff out this problem before it becomes a much more widespread problem.  And that is the strategy that we’re implementing here, is to try to invest early to prevent this from becoming much more serious.
There are some -- there’s always sort of the geopolitical concern that an outbreak of a disease could create some instability in some of these regions where the central governments of some of these countries isn’t as strong as the central government that we have here in this country.  So that's one source of some concern.
The other concern that the President articulated in the context of his interview was that the more that this virus has spread from person to person, the greater likelihood, the greater -- the more likely it is that the virus could mutate in a way that makes it even more dangerous.  So that is why -- those are just a couple of reasons why the President is directing the U.S. government to make the kind of early investment that could prevent much more serious problems down the line.
Q    And on one other topic, there’s a vote coming up in a couple days in Scotland.  The President has talked about this before.  With the vote nearing and the polls very close, how concerned is the White House, how concerned is the President about a potential breakup of one of its closest allies?
MR. EARNEST:  Jeff, you have a good memory.  The President was asked about this when he attended I believe the G7 meeting --
Q    In Brussels.
MR. EARNEST:  -- in Brussels, exactly.  He was standing alongside David Cameron at a podium not unlike this one where he was asked.
You’ll recall that what the President said was he said that from the outside, the United States has a deep interest in ensuring that one of the closest allies that we’ll ever have remains strong, robust, united, and an effective partner with the United States.  So this is a decision for the people of Scotland to make.  We certainly respect the right of individual Scots to make a decision about the -- along these lines.  But as the President himself said, we have an interest in seeing the United Kingdom remain strong, robust, united and an effective partner.
Q    And “united” means together, as in not leaving the U.K.?
MR. EARNEST:  Well, this is a question before the people of Scotland on Thursday, and they’ll cast a ballot in a way that they believe is in the best interests of communities in Scotland.  And I will certainly respect their right to cast their own ballot without interference from people on the outside.
Christi.
Q    Thanks, Josh.  Can you talk about the Tampa part of the President’s trip?  That looks like it’s about building public support for his strategy for fighting ISIL.  Is that the plan?
MR. EARNEST:  Well, at a very specific level, the President’s visit to Tampa will be an opportunity for him to visit the Central Command, which is located in Tampa.  While he’s there, he will spend some time getting a briefing from senior military leaders in CENTCOM about responsibility for leading the military effort against ISIL. 
And I’m confident that the President, while he’s there, will also have the opportunity to talk with some of the servicemen and women who will be responsible for carrying out some of the functions that the President orders.  But we’ll have more details on the trip probably tomorrow.
Let’s move around a little bit.  Jackie.
Q    Just to go back to Ebola -- an administration official was quoted as saying that there will be a more upscale response.  Can you give some details of what that will be?
MR. EARNEST:  The President is looking forward to his trip.  He is going to get a briefing from some of the experts at the CDC.  In terms of announcements that the President may make in the context of the trip, I’ll let him make those announcements on Tuesday.  I don't have anything new from here.  But you’re right -- there will be some additional announcements that will be announced by the administration that represents the kind of whole-of-government approach the President believes is necessary to confront the threat that's posed by -- the threat of Ebola. 
Justin.
Q    You almost said ISIL.
MR. EARNEST:  I did, I did.  (Laughter.)
Q    Well, I wanted to follow a little on Ebola.  We’ve kind of heard from public health experts, especially people in Africa, a lot of complaints actually about the administration’s response so far.  There’s a professor from Brown University in The Times this weekend who said the 25-bed hospital that the U.S. is setting up is like a drop in the bucket of what they need.  So I’m wondering if you could just respond in some way to the criticism that’s being levied by them, by Doctors Without Borders about the lack of kind of a unified response coming from the U.S. and United Nations and WHO and other places.
MR. EARNEST:  Justin, the President referenced in the remarks that he delivered to the nation on Wednesday night that the United States has unique capabilities in a wide range of areas.  And that means that the United States has a unique responsibility to step up in the midst of an international crisis.  And the President has directed the United States government to step up in the midst of this international crisis as it relates to Ebola; that our doctors and scientists are some of the best in the world, and we’re going to deploy their knowledge and resources to try to help some of the governments in Africa meet the needs of their people and confront this very difficult challenge.
The United States also has tremendous resources when it comes to our logistical capacity and when it comes to the kinds of supplies that health care workers may need to respond to this situation.  So there are a number of unique capabilities that the United States can bring to this.  And I think it is a testament to our country, where our -- where we have an interest but our interest is not as direct in this situation, but yet the President, with the strong backing of the American people, is going to respond in a robust fashion.
As I mentioned to Jeff, the United States responded pretty aggressively to this back in March when this outbreak was first reported.  And since that time, our assistance has been steadily ramping up.  And when the President travels to Atlanta tomorrow in the context of his trip, I do anticipate that we’ll have some additional announcements to make about additional commitments that we’re making in terms of resources that can be used to address this problem.
Q    Just on the CR quickly -- I know this may be a long shot, but can you kind of give an update of where you guys think or how you think this vote is going to go?  Do you expect that the Title 10 authorization will be at this point separated out in the House from a vote on the CR and then brought back together?  Is that where you’re at?
MR. EARNEST:  Well, that will be a decision that’s made by the Speaker of the House.  Our interest here is seeing this Title 10 authority be given to the administration before the end of this week.  Adding it to the CR is the most logical way.  As a layman -- I’m not an expert in House procedure by any stretch of the imagination -- but as a layman, it does seem obvious that that’s the easiest way to get this done.  That will be a decision that’s made by the Speaker of the House. 
And this administration will be doing everything that we can, including being in close touch with members of Congress in both parties, to convince them that this is an important national security priority.  And if they have open questions about what this authority would grant or what these kinds of training operations would entail, we’ll do our best to answer those questions.  But this is something that we’re going to work really hard, and the President believes this is a top priority.
Q    And in terms of language, are you happy with what you’ve heard from House leadership about what will come up at some point?  Is your request going to be something that you think is going to get a vote?
MR. EARNEST:  Well, I know that there has been a constructive conversation between staff in the Speaker’s office on this topic and senior officials here in the administration.  So those conversations are ongoing and I anticipate they will be ongoing probably right up until the vote.
Stephen.
Q    Back to the Scotland thing.  So are you saying that if Scotland goes it alone on Thursday, what is left will no longer be a strong and robust ally?  (Laughter.)
MR. EARNEST:  That’s a clever question.  (Laughter.)  Attempting to answer it might be interpreted by some as unnecessarily or maybe even improperly interfering with a decision that should rightly be made by the voters of Scotland.  So I don’t think I’ll elaborate any further on what the President himself said in terms of articulating what America’s interest was in the outcome of this election that, again, will be decided by no one other than the Scottish people.
Q    But is there any concern or is has there been any sort of thinking about what would happen if the U.K. was weaker in NATO, if your close ally lost some weight in the Security Council?  There must be implications for U.S. policy in that.
MR. EARNEST:  I suspect that there is somebody in the administration who has been thinking about that at some level.  I don’t know to what level it has risen -- it certainly hasn’t risen to my level.  (Laughter.)  Or maybe it hasn’t sunk to my level -- I’ll let you interpret that for yourself.  I haven’t been a part of those conversations.  We are confident that ultimately the people of Scotland will make a decision that they believe is in their best interest.  And the President himself articulated what he believed was important about our partners over there at the United Kingdom.
Kristen.
Q    Josh, thank you.  In the wake of learning about the brutal execution of British aid worker, David Haines, over the weekend, Prime Minister David Cameron came out and he had very strong language that seemed to indicate that he was at least considering stronger military action.  Can you update us on that?  Is there any indication the U.K. is going to join the U.S. when it comes to launching airstrikes in Syria?
MR. EARNEST:  I don’t have an update on those conversations.  We are in close touch with our allies in the U.K. on a range of issues, including this one.  But any announcements that they have to make about commitments they’re prepared to make to take the fight to ISIL will be made by them.
Q    Well, can you characterize how this -- how you see this moment?  I mean, there’s obviously increased pressure on Prime Minister Cameron in the wake of this.  So are there discussions ongoing about more coordination, since this is our closest ally?
MR. EARNEST:  The United States is in close touch with the United Kingdom.  As you know, we have a special relationship with them.  They also have very unique military capabilities that can be --
Q    But don’t you expect them to join the United States in launching airstrikes, given that?
MR. EARNEST:  We need to -- have had the kinds of constructive conversations that you would expect from a close ally like the United Kingdom, and we do anticipate that they will play an important role in this coalition.  In terms of what role they’re going to play, we’ll give them the opportunity to make an announcement about anything they might be contemplating contributing to this effort.
Let me point out one thing.  They have contributed already to some of the humanitarian military efforts that the President ordered last month in Iraq.  I believe they dropped some humanitarian supplies near Mount Sinjar that brought some relief to those individuals who were being persecuted there.  So they’ve already played an important role here.  But they obviously have the capacity to do significantly more, and we’re having close conversations with them about that. 
Q    And I want to just follow up on Julie’s line of questioning.  Over the weekend, several senior administration officials said that the U.S. had gotten some assurances from several Arab countries that they would join in an air campaign.  Is that still the case?
MR. EARNEST:  I’ve seen those reports.  I saw that many of those individuals were talking privately because they didn’t want to make any sort of announcements that should be properly made by those governments who are contemplating making a contribution to the coalition.  So I don’t want to speak publicly about those conversations either.
Q    Well, I understand you can’t name them specifically, but is it still the case that several Arab countries have said that they are going to join in an air campaign?
MR. EARNEST:  Well, again, in line with Julie’s question, as soon as I say yes, you’re going to ask me which countries -- and understandably so.  That is a totally legitimate line of questioning.  But I just don’t want to go down that path, because I’m not prepared to be in a position to make announcements for these countries that may be contemplating commitments.
If the shoe were on the other foot -- and somewhere there probably is the press secretary for an Arab government being asked what the United States is actually prepared to do.  And I would be --
Q    Which one?  (Laughter.)
MR. EARNEST:  And I would take umbrage if that individual were to make commitments on behalf of the United States, so I’m certainly not going to make commitments on behalf of these other countries. 
We’re pleased with the progress of the conversations we’ve been having with them, and those conversations continue.  The Secretary of State has been principally responsible for them.  I would anticipate that General Allen will continue to have those kinds of conversations as well.  But I’m not -- at this point, I’m not in a position to announce specific commitments.
Q    And just, finally, does McDonough seem to indicate that you had also gotten some assurances from some countries that they would send ground troops into the region?  And I guess my question is, how can the U.S. expect other countries to send in combat forces when the U.S. is not prepared to do that?
MR. EARNEST:  Well, again, I don’t want this to be interpreted as me implicitly confirming a commitment from some other country.  I’m not doing that.  But suffice it to say, there are countries in the region that arguably -- at least arguably -- have as much of a stake in the outcome of this fight with ISIL as anybody else; that this violence and havoc that ISIL is wreaking in this neighborhood is having a negative impact on the broader region.  In some cases, these acts of violence are being perpetrated not far from the border of other countries.  To make matters even worse, these acts are being committed in the name of the Sunni-Muslim religion. 
It is incredibly important for moderate voices to step forward.  And the President himself made the case that many of these Muslim -- I’m sorry, these Sunni-led governments in the region have for a long time, based on sectarian divisions, considered Shia-led governments, or Shia-led interests to be the greatest threat to their country.  The President posited, I think with some -- in a way that’s entirely reasonable, that these extremist elements of the Sunni sect actually pose a greater threat to these Sunni countries than the Shia sect does because of these terrible acts of violence that are all being committed in the name of this religion, setting aside the fact that many of the victims of this terrible violence are themselves Muslim. 
So this is a very difficult situation, but the interest that many of these governments in the region [have] is even more substantial than the interest of the U.S. government.  But that is why it is so critically important for this international coalition to be built, and it’s why it’s important for people all around the world to understand that this is not a case of ISIL being dug in in a fight against the United States.  The international community is mobilizing to take the fight to ISIL because of the terrible nature of their acts and because of their nihilistic vision.
Ed.
Q    What then is holding these Sunni nations back?  Given the stakes you just laid out, why haven't they come forward?
MR. EARNEST:  Well, Ed, again, I don’t think that there’s anything holding them back.  I think that what we’re seeing is --
Q    They remain anonymous.  You won’t give us their names.  That's holding back.
MR. EARNEST:  I think what we’re seeing is we’re seeing very constructive engagement from regional governments that do have a significant stake in this outcome.
We’re pleased with the level of conversations that we’re having with these governments, and their willingness to contribute in a tangible, important way to this broader effort.  We’ll have some announcements to make in terms of what sort of cooperation and involvement and commitment that we have from the international community.  And based on the tenor and tone of the kinds of private conversations that are underway right now, we expect those commitments to be substantial.
Q    But didn't the President sort of lay out a call to action last Wednesday night?  I didn't think he was saying to the world, let’s have some conversations.  I mean, five days have passed.  I understand that might not seem like a lot of time, but ISIS -- the threat is there.  The President himself laid out the stakes last Wednesday night.  So is this not a failure for Secretary Kerry to not get this coalition together?
MR. EARNEST:  Ed, based on the very strong statements that we’re seeing from public officials representing these other governments, there is a clear indication that this coalition is coming together very nicely.
Q    But you won’t even give us the names of the countries in this room as to which Arab nations are going to help with airstrikes.
MR. EARNEST:  Well, Ed, because they will make those sorts of announcements when they have them.  We have seen very clear statements.  And we talked about this a little bit last week, that we saw -- we’ve seen this statement, the Jeddah communiqué, from ministers representing states of the Gulf Cooperation Council, Egypt, Iraq, Jordan, Lebanon and the United States.  And all of them promised -- “agreed to do their share in the comprehensive fight against ISIL,” including a wide range of things and “as appropriate, joining in the many aspects of a coordinated military campaign against ISIL.”
So we have seen clear public commitments from a broad range of nations to joining the broader military and international effort to combat ISIL.
Now, the other thing we should point out is there are a variety of ways to participate in a military effort, aside from just carrying out airstrikes -- that there are training and equipping that can be done; that there’s logistical support that can be offered, and even things like refueling aircraft.  So there are a variety of ways that these nations can contribute to the overall effort, and I would anticipate that as we get closer to the U.N. General Assembly, we’ll have some more details about the commitments that are being made. 
Q    So that’s more of the timetable?  Later this month, then, because that’s obviously a week or so away.
MR. EARNEST:  Well, yes, I would anticipate that next week that there will be discussions about this question that you’re asking.
Q    And one other quick thing.  Secretary Kerry was talking yesterday on CBS about when it comes to U.S. airstrikes in Syria, the U.S. can “de-conflict” such attacks with the Syrian government.”  He said, “We will certainly want to de-conflict to make certain that they’re not about to do something that they might regret.”  Can you explain to the American people what he is saying there?  Because it’s obviously a very -- a much different situation from Iraq, where we have been invited in to attack ISIS.  In the case of Syria, President Assad may respond. 
MR. EARNEST:  Well, just to be real clear, Ed, the United States is not coordinating with the Assad regime regarding any contingency plans that the United States military is developing.  As we’ve made very clear, the United States will take lawful action when our people are threatened, regardless of any geographic boundaries.  We have seen that ISIL has disregarded the vanishing boundary between Iraq and Syria, and we’re not going to be -- the United States is not going to place ourselves at a strategic disadvantage by honoring a boundary that our enemies don’t.
So beyond that, I’m not in a position to telegraph in advance what our plans may be.
Q    But when Secretary Kerry says -- I want to make certain -- “they’re not about” -- he is talking about Assad -- “they’re not about to do something they might regret,” is the President prepared, if Syrian defense forces respond to U.S. war planes going and launching airstrikes in Syria, is the President prepared to take out Assad’s defense forces?
MR. EARNEST:  Well, let me say it this way, Ed.  There are a couple of ways I think to deal with this.  The first is there are rules of engagement any time that our men and women in uniform are put into harm’s way.  And so there will be rules of engagement that are related to any military orders that the President directs -- military actions that the President directs.  So I’d refer you to the Department of Defense for a detailed assessment of that.  But it won’t surprise you to know that there are contingencies related to self-defense when it comes to these sorts of rules of engagement.
The other point that I’d make as it relates to Syria is, as you all know and as has been publicly reported earlier this summer, the President did authorize a military mission that put American boots on the ground into Syria to try to rescue American hostages that were being held by ISIL.  That mission was a high-risk mission; there were a substantial number of American servicemen and women that were involved.  That mission was executed flawlessly, but it unfortunately did not result in the safe rescue and return of American hostages. 
But I can say that while I think it is evident to anybody who is paying attention here that that is -- indicates the President’s willingness to order the kind of military action that’s required to protect the lives of military -- of American citizens, even if it means sending our military into Syria.
Q    Thank you, Josh.  Iran -- they said they rejected an offer or an invitation from the United States to join the fight against ISIL.  What did you exactly want Iran to do?  And weren’t you concerned that Iran joining this coalition would further discourage Sunni nations of joining the fight?
MR. EARNEST:  The thing that we have been really clear about is that the United States does not coordinate military action or share intelligence with Iran, and we don’t have any plans to do so.  There have been a couple of conversations that have occurred, most notably along the sidelines of the P5-plus-1 talks between U.S. officials and their Iranian counterparts.
This was an effort to communicate with them about our interests and our plans, but it did not reflect any change in our position that we’re not going to coordinate military action or share intelligence with the Iranians.  I’ll repeat a point that I’ve made here a couple of times, which is that it is not in the interest of the nation of Iran for ISIL to make continued inroads as it relates to taking over ground in Iraq; that this kind of instability is not in the interest of any government in that region and it’s certainly not in the interest of Iran. 
So it’s understandable that Iran may be talking about and maybe even taking actions to counter ISIL, but those will not be military actions that are coordinated with the United States because the United States does not coordinate our military action or share intelligence with the nation of Iran.
Carol.
Q    Sort of following on that, a year ago the President was pursuing an informal meeting or handshake on the sidelines of the U.N. General Assembly with President Rouhani.  Is that something that he is looking to pursue next week when the two of them are in New York again for the U.N. General Assembly?
MR. EARNEST:  I don’t know of any planned communication between President Obama and President Rouhani that’s scheduled for the U.N.  If that changes, we’ll let you know.
But the nature of our conversations with Iran right now is principally focused on resolving the nuclear issue.  And there are senior level administration officials that have been directed by this President to engage with their Iranian counterparts to try to reach -- resolve the international community’s concerns about Iran’s nuclear program.  But that’s the focal point of those conversations, and I don’t know what the nature of conversations will be in New York, if any occur.
Q    Last year when you guys were asked this same question, you were very clear that it was possible that there would be some sort of meeting, indicating that you were open to it.  That doesn't seem to be what you’re saying here now.  Or is it fair to say that you’re not interested in having a similar informal kind of meeting?  Or are you saying that it is possible that this could happen next week?
MR. EARNEST:  I think what I’m trying to convey -- the reason that it was trickier then is that it was a pretty -- the conversation that occurred between President Obama and President Rouhani last year was historic because it was the first conversation between the Iranian President and the American President in 30 or 40 years.  So now that -- the historical significance of a conversation this year would be somewhat different.
Q    Well, it would still be historical. 
MR. EARNEST:  It would be interesting.
Q    Well, it would still be historical -- I mean, it would definitely be historical if they met in person or shook hands.
MR. EARNEST:  It would be interesting.   It would be interesting.
Q    I don’t think you would dispute that.
MR. EARNEST:  It would be interesting.  I think what I’m trying to convey is I don't know of a specific plan for that to occur at this time.  But if it does, if something like that is added to the President’s schedule, then we’ll, of course, let you know.
Q    Is that a possibility?
MR. EARNEST:  Right now, there are no plans to do that.  But if it changes, we’ll let you know.
J.C.
Q    To follow up a bit on Ed’s question, take it another step, U.S.-Russian relations has seen better times, needless to say.  However, would the President enlist --
MR. EARNEST:  I mean, I think you could say that Russia’s relationship with the Western world has seen better times.  They're probably at their low point since the end of the Cold War.  Russia’s actions that are destabilizing in Ukraine have isolated them from much of Europe and the world because they’ve refused to sort of contribute to the situation in a positive way.  But, yes, that includes the United States.
Q    Then my question may be even more poignant.
MR. EARNEST:  Okay.
Q    Thank you.  (Laughter.) 
Q    Pointed, poignant? 
Q    Poignant, pungent, whatever.  (Laughter.)  I’ll ask -- however, I will ask it.  Would the President consider reaching out to President Putin on behalf of his and the Western allies and regional allies to denigrate ISIL, especially considering, as Ed was saying, Syria, that issue?  Is there a strong relationship with Syria and President Assad?
MR. EARNEST:  Well, I’ll say a couple things about that.  The first is the President is looking forward to the meeting that he’s having with President Poroshenko here at the White House later this week, and that will be an opportunity for him to discuss the latest as it relates to their efforts to lock down the cease-fire, get both sides to agree to it.  And that will be a very important meeting, and one the President looks forward to.
As it relates to President Putin, I don't have any meetings with President Putin to announce at this point.  It could be added to the schedule, but I don't have anything like that to announce at this point.
Clearly, Russia, like much of the developed world, the civilized world is rightly concerned about ISIL.  They are concerned because of the destabilizing impact that this terrible group is having on the region.  They're rightly concerned about this issue of foreign fighters, something that we’ve talked about from here.  These are individuals with foreign passports that have traveled to the region to take up the fight alongside ISIL.  And there is the concern that these individuals, after getting some training and equipment and becoming further radicalized, could return back to the country from which they originated and carry out acts of violence.  So I think President Putin -- at least I’ve heard him publicly articulate a concern about this. 
And in the same way that we have sought to try to work constructively with the Russians where possible, where our interests align, notwithstanding our differences, I would anticipate that there may be an opportunity for us to find a constructive way to work with the Russians on this too.
It was just a year ago that the United States embarked on an effort, working closely with the Russians, to destroy Syria’s declared chemical weapons stockpile.  That was an effort that was successfully completed earlier this year.  That effort would not have been successful without the cooperation and coordination with the Russians.  That's evidence of our ability to coordinate on high-priority issues in this region of the world.  And if there’s an opportunity for us to do that as it relates to ISIL, I’m sure that we’ll take advantage of that opportunity.
Q    Thank you.
MR. EARNEST:  Mike.
Q    But that could go on for ages, Josh.
MR. EARNEST:  Mike, go ahead. 
Q    Just to get back to Ebola real quick.  You mentioned the part of the President’s interview where he talked about the fear of it mutating.  Is that a sort of a hypothetical musing on his part or is it accurate to describe the government of the United States worried about the likelihood of that mutation?  And is he reflecting a kind of sense of the medical community that this is a real danger and a real possibility?
MR. EARNEST:  I think what the President was trying to articulate is the risk associated with failing to aggressively respond to the situation.  I think it is -- I’m certainly not a scientist, and I don't have any special knowledge of Ebola.  But my understanding based on public reports is that if the disease is contained relatively soon, that the risk of a mutation like this is pretty low. 
I think what the President was illustrating is that if we didn't respond aggressively, and as the only nation in the world -- the world’s indispensable nation -- we have unique capabilities to respond to this.  That's why it’s in our interest to do so; that if we fail to respond to this and we allow the virus to spiral out of control, there is the potential that it could mutate in a way that could end up being dangerous for people back here in the U.S.
Right now, the risk of an Ebola outbreak in the United States is very low.  But that risk would only increase if there were not a robust response on the part of the United States.  And that's why the President -- among other things -- that's one of the things that's motivating the President to direct an aggressive response.
Q    But to the specific question of the mutation, of the possibility of the mutation, he’s -- by raising that, he’s not suggesting that there is some concern on the part of the medical community in the United States that that possibility is that there’s some likelihood of that mutation happening, and that there is some increased level of concern that you know of?
MR. EARNEST:  I think what the President was trying to describe is that that likelihood remains very low right now, but it only increases the further that this virus is allowed to spread, and that is what’s -- that is an important part of what’s motivating the President to direct such a robust response to the situation that right now does not pose a significant threat to the United States.
Jim.
Q    Has the President authorized the Pentagon to target individual leaders of ISIS in Syria or Iraq?  And I know in the past the White House has said that senior leaders of al Qaeda have been decimated.  Do you want to see the same thing happen with ISIS?  Do you want to take those leaders out?
MR. EARNEST:  Well, Jim, I will say that the President is still reviewing the plans and proposals that the Department of Defense has been hard at work developing.  When this situation first cropped up -- I’m specifically referring to the significant advance that ISIL made across western and northern Iraq back in June -- the President immediately directed the United States military to increase significantly the amount of intelligence, surveillance and reconnaissance missions that were conducted in that region of the world.  And that has been part and parcel of an effort to improve our knowledge about the situation on the ground.
Pentagon planners, in turn, have used that knowledge to develop some plans and target lists and other things for the President to consider as he puts together a military strategy for confronting ISIL.
This is a strategy that involves, as we’ve talked about here a little bit already, training and equipping soldiers on the ground.  In Iraq, that means Iraqi and Kurdish security forces.  In Syria, that means ramping up our assistance to the Syrian opposition fighters to take the fight to ISIL on the ground.  And they can be backed up with American military airpower.  But those plans are still being reviewed by the President, and --
Q    So in terms of authorizing airstrikes, you’re not there yet?  You’re not ready to announce that yet? 
MR. EARNEST:  Well, there are --
Q    I mean strikes on individual leaders.
MR. EARNEST:  Well, there are airstrikes that the President has already ordered in Iraq, and some 150 or so have already been carried out.  But as it relates to the specific plans that the President is reviewing, I don't have additional insight to share with you about them right now.
Q    When you said degrade or destroy ISIS, that should mean take out their leadership -- isn’t that right?
MR. EARNEST:  Well, depriving these organizations of leaders, either on the battlefield or in command and control centers, certainly would have the effect of degrading and possibly ultimately destroying them.  But I don't want to get ahead of any decision-making at the presidential level that still needs to be done.
Q    And getting back to the coalition that the President is building and that the Secretary of State is building, I know you don't want to talk about which states are doing what, or who is going to be involved and so forth, but it is the goal of this White House to have a coalition that extends beyond the United States that will engage in these military actions, these kinetic military actions in Iraq and Syria.  It wouldn’t be a success, would it, if you had a coalition that did not have other countries participating in airstrikes, would it?
MR. EARNEST:  Well, Jim, what we are seeking is the robust contribution of nations in the region and around the world to this allied effort.  And we would anticipate that we will have countries that have significant military capabilities contributing to this broader effort.
Now, as I mentioned -- or I guess as I sort of alluded to with Ed, there are a variety of ways in which member countries can contribute militarily to this effort.  It doesn't just mean carrying out airstrikes themselves.  It could include providing some logistical support.  It could include refueling.  There are other surveillance efforts that other nations could undertake that would contribute to broader military success.  There are a lot of different ways to contribute militarily to this coalition.  So I don't want to get ahead, again, of any specific commitments that have been made by members of this coalition.
Q    And just to go back to what Denis McDonough said yesterday, he was asked on a number of occasions about boots on the ground, and he reiterated that you’re really looking at Iraqi and Syrian boots on the ground, and potentially some other partners that may come into the mix.  But you’ve heard some critics up on Capitol Hill say that that's just too limiting.  Any second thoughts about just taking that completely off the table?  Are you saying that that will never occur, U.S. combat boots on the ground?  What if this escalates and becomes a longer, more protracted battle than you anticipated? 
MR. EARNEST:  Jim, I can say definitively that the President has ruled out sending American boots on the ground to be engaged in a combat role in Iraq and in Syria.  The strategy that the President has put forward to deal with the threat posed by ISIL in Iraq and Syria is substantially different from the strategy that was put in place in advance of the last conflict in Iraq. 
What we’re considering here is more akin to the kinds of counterterrorism operations that have been successfully implemented in some other regions of the world.  And those other countries, using some of our military capability, using our support for local fighters on the ground who could take the fight in their own country to the extremist organizations that are operating there, and building up the local government structures of some of these other nations -- that that has been a successful strategy for mitigating the threat, and even degrading the threat that is posed by --
Q    Where has that strategy been successful? 
MR. EARNEST:  Well, they’re places like --
Q    Not Somalia or Yemen.
MR. EARNEST:  Well, those are actually two of the countries that I was just going to cite.  There is no doubt that in these two places the United States has deployed --
Q    Somalia --
MR. EARNEST:  Let me finish.  That when the United States has deployed a strategy, that strategy has been specifically to work with local governments to build up the capacity of those central governments, to work with local fighters to make sure that we’re increasing their capacity so that they can take the fight on the ground to these extremist organizations, and, where necessary, American military might can be deployed in support of those fighters on the ground to degrade the capacity of those individual organizations. 
And just a couple of weeks ago, we saw an effort in Somalia, led by Somalian fighters, to take out the leader of al-Shabaab in that country.  That will have the effect of degrading and ultimately defeating al-Shabaab.  Is that mission completed?  Of course not.  They continue to serve as a threat.  But there is no doubt that this strategy has been successful.
Q    You’re holding up those countries as success stories, though.
MR. EARNEST:  What I’m holding them up as -- as a place --
Q    You’ve had some successes here and there, but you wouldn’t hold them up as success stories.
MR. EARNEST:  They are a place where the American counterterrorism strategy that has been put in place by President Obama has succeeded in degrading the threat that those organizations pay to the United States.  And we intend to implement an analogous strategy against ISIL. 
Go ahead, Sam.
Q    In light of what you just said, there were reports this weekend that ISIL has struck a non-aggression pact with some of the moderate Syrian rebels.  In light of what you just said about arming people on the ground to take the fight for the U.S., are you troubled by these reports?  What should we make of them?
MR. EARNEST:  I’m not.  I’m just looking this up because there is a -- I know that there was a statement from this moderate opposition group to indicate that those reports of a cease-fire were not true.  This is the Syrian Revolutionaries Front, and that’s the group that’s mentioned in the story that you’re referencing.  They’ve issued a statement indicating that they never ceased hostilities with ISIL and will continue to fight ISIL and the regime. 
In fact, I understand that right now, as we speak, that the SRF and ISIL are currently fighting in a suburb in Syria and in the suburb that’s referenced in the article -- they actually continue to fight one another -- and that the SRF and other elements of the moderate opposition have joined forces over the last couple of months to try to push ISIL out of the region.
Now, I know that there are some claims that suggest that one local brigade of the Syrian Revolutionaries Front reached a 24-hour agreement with ISIL that quickly broke down, but it was intended to allow both sides to retrieve the bodies of their fighters who had been killed in the ongoing conflict there.  But I --
Q    You’re confident that U.S. diplomacy to these moderate Syrians will outweigh ISIS’s diplomacy plan?  That they -- sorry -- (laughter) -- that they -- my train of thought is still lost -- that they won’t end up being much more persuasive than we are?  I mean, they’re fighting right there alongside them.  Also --
MR. EARNEST:  Well, they’re not fighting alongside them.  They’re actually fighting them.  And they have been for three years.
Q    But related to that, the German ambassador was quoted in the New York Times saying that the reason Germany won’t provide weapons to the moderate Syrian rebels is that they have no confidence where those weapons will end up.  Why are we so much more confident about the final destination of the weapons than the Germans are?
MR. EARNEST:  Well, let me say that we do have more confidence in the kinds of relationships that the international community has with the opposition fighters because the opposition fighters are not fighting the international community -- they’re fighting ISIL.  So I’m skeptical that ISIL is going to have a whole lot of success approaching them and achieving a diplomatic breakthrough.
Secondly, as it relates to our efforts to build relationships with these opposition fighters, over the course of the last three years, the administration has been seeking to build relationships and get greater understanding into who these individuals are and what cause they represent.  And that does give us greater confidence in our ability to provide support and training and equipment to those individuals who will use that support, training and equipment in a way that’s consistent with U.S. interests. 
Major.
Q    So what’s more likely:  A meeting with President Rouhani or meeting with President Putin at UNGA?  (Laughter.)
MR. EARNEST:  I welcome your interest in the President’s schedule at the United Nations General Assembly.  It will be --
Q    Which would be more beneficial?
MR. EARNEST:  Well, I don’t know that either of those individuals will appear on the President’s dance card next week.  So when we have the President’s schedule laid out, we can discuss it.
Q    When you said that Russia is rightly concerned about ISIL, it sounded to me as if you were indicating that there might be something that we’re discussing with them that is indicating to this administration Russia might be willing to play a role.  Are you trying to do that?
MR. EARNEST:  I did not mean to leave you with that impression.  There may be conversations that are going on.  I don’t happen to know of them if there are.  I was merely trying to highlight something that I think even President Putin himself has acknowledged, which is that he has a similar concern to the one that has been expressed by leaders of countries throughout Europe, which is that there are individuals who have traveled to the region and taken up arms alongside ISIL who pose a threat to their home countries.
Q    Would we welcome their help?  And are we soliciting it?
MR. EARNEST:  Well, again, I don’t know of any conversations between U.S. officials and Russian officials on this specific topic.  I will just merely observe that there have been areas where the United States has been able to work in a coordinated fashion and a mutually beneficial fashion to advance our interests and advance the interests of Russians as well. 
So I certainly wouldn’t rule out those kinds of conversations, and I certainly wouldn’t rule out that kind of coordination.  I just don’t know if those conversations have taken place at this point.
Q    It also seems to me that today you’re kind of suggesting a sequencing we should familiarize ourselves with.  At UNGA next week, that’s really where the President is going to try to lay down these commitments or advise the Arab nations to make public what they’ve privately committed, and that in the context of a Security Council and General Assembly resolution, this will all sort of carry with it a greater degree of international legitimacy, and that’s when the expansion of this military campaign will follow.  Is that a sequence that you’re trying to suggest we get used to?
MR. EARNEST:  Well, I wouldn’t say it quite that specifically.  Let’s take one step back from this, which is that the President has appointed -- or the Secretary of State has appointed General John Allen to take the lead in coordinating the contributions of countries who are going to be part of this broader coalition.  General Allen is already hard at work on that task, and he’ll be meeting with the President tomorrow to give him an update in terms of the status of those commitments. 
What the United States is seeking to do, however -- prior to announcing public commitments from countries or members of the coalition -- is to put together a list of essentially the needs of the coalition.  We want to walk through a checklist of all the needed commitments, and then we’ll go back to individual countries and ask them to fulfill these individual -- these specific needs.  So there is some coordination and integration that needs to go on here.
Frankly, it is not -- it would not be most effective for countries around the world to be issuing news releases about what sort of commitments they’re willing to make in a haphazard fashion.  Rather, what we’re seeking to do is to integrate and coordinate those commitments in a way so as to make sure that we have an organized coalition to support those who are on the ground who are taking the fight to ISIL. 
Q    Logically, that work would culminate at the General Assembly meeting so you would have maximized, A, visibility, and B, a sort of echo effect in that assembly of the world’s greatest leaders.
MR. EARNEST:  Well, I would anticipate that conversations with members of the coalition will occur throughout this week.  And I would anticipate that some face-to-face conversations will also occur at the U.N. General Assembly next week.  So I’m not here to set up a specific deadline, but I can give you some insight into the plan that we’re pursuing right now.
Q    Quickly, on Ebola -- you said, as what we all know, that the United States has unique logistical capacity.  Is the United States doing everything it can with its logistical capacity to address Ebola?
MR. EARNEST:  Well, the President will have more to say about this tomorrow, and I would anticipate that you’ll see an announcement related to ramping up the kind of assistance the United States can provide to try to meet this need.
Q    But there are, besides beds and mobile hospitals, there are two enormous Navy ships that many have argued would be perfect for doing the kind of medicine that’s required to isolate and treat victims of this disease in Africa, and they’re not, so far as I understand, even being considered.  And that’s why I ask -- is the United States, with its unique logistical capacity and unique capabilities, doing everything it can to address this epidemic?
MR. EARNEST:  I will reserve further comment on this until the President’s announcements tomorrow.
Jon.
Q    Josh, I just want to follow up on -- Jim asked you about whether or not the Pentagon has been given the authority to go after specific leaders of ISIL.  You said the President is still reviewing options that have been presented to him.  So are you saying that the military right now does not have the authority to conduct airstrikes specifically targeting leaders of ISIL?  That they can’t specifically target Baghdadi, the leader of the group, or they couldn’t specifically target the executioner we’ve seen in those videos, if we had intelligence on where they were?  Will the military now have the authority to do that kind of an airstrike?
MR. EARNEST:  Well, let’s separate a couple of things here.  The first is, the President has given orders to the Department of Defense as it relates to airstrikes that they’re already carrying out in Iraq against ISIL.  As I think I’ve been asked before, the President is not required to sign off on each of those strikes, that they have a -- they have broad guidance that the President has given them.  And they have carried out --
Q    But the guidance hasn’t --
MR. EARNEST:  -- a large number of missions under that guidance.
Q    But the guidance still has not included individual leaders, which is I think why Jim asked you that question.  Are they now -- do they now have a green light to go after individual leaders?
MR. EARNEST:  Well, there has been very specific guidance that's been provided to the Department of Defense about what their -- what sort of orders they’ve been given by the Commander-in-Chief.  I’m not in a position to get into the details of what those communications are.
But, however, when it comes to the individual that you referenced, the person that we know is culpable for the killing of Mr. Foley and Mr. Sotloff, that individual is someone who, as the President himself has said, will face justice for what he has done.  And we will -- and the President has already articulated that we will expend significant resources to bring that individual to justice.
Q    Have you identified who that person is yet?
MR. EARNEST:  As we’ve said for a couple of weeks now, the United States is working closely with our special partners -- or our allies at the -- in the United Kingdom and other nations that have intelligence and knowledge of this specific region of the world to try to determine the identity of that individual.  I don't have an update on that process at this point.
Q    And if I can ask for a clarification on what you said  about Iran. 
MR. EARNEST:  Sure.
Q    You made it clear that the United States will not coordinate militarily or in terms of intelligence with the Iranians.  So I’m just wondering, what -- the Supreme Leader of Iran said that the Iranian government has turned down a request from the United States for support in the battle against ISIL.  So was there any request that was made through back-channels to the Iranians?  You’ve ruled out military or intelligence.  Was there any other kind of a request that was made by the Iranians for cooperation in this fight that he’s now announcing that they're turning down?
MR. EARNEST:  Certainly none that I’m aware of.  Like I said, the United States does not coordinate military action or share intelligence with the Iranians.  And there have been a couple of back-channel conversations that have occurred, principally through -- in the context of the P5-plus-1 talks.  I know --
Q    Back-channel conversations about Iraq and about ISIL?
MR. EARNEST:  Well, those conversations, yes, were about this topic because there is a shared interest between our two countries.  There’s so much that the U.S. and Iran disagrees on, but there is a shared interest that we have here.  It is not in the interest of Iran for this extremist group to be wreaking havoc across their -- the open territory of their neighbor.
So we will -- I would anticipate that there will continue to be back-channel -- the occasional back-channel conversation on this topic between the United States and other members of the international community and the Iranians.  But our posture, as it relates to not coordinating military actions or sharing intelligence with the Iranians, hasn’t changed and we don't have a plan to change that posture right now.
Q    Okay, but I’m asking -- just to clarify, I’m asking a little more broadly, because the Supreme Leader has come out and he said that the Iranian government is rejecting a request from the United States for cooperation.  And what you’re saying is there has been no -- there’s been meetings, there have been discussions, but there has been no request from the United States for cooperation of any kind with the Iranians in this battle against ISIL?
MR. EARNEST:  Well, again, our posture here is that we are not going to coordinate our military actions or our intelligence-sharing activities with the Iranians.  And I did not see the direct quote from the Supreme Leader so I’m not exactly sure which aspect of -- what his eventual point was, or what he was alluding to.  But outside of a couple of back-channel conversations in which we talked about our shared interests in confronting this problem, our plans to not coordinate our military actions with Iran haven’t changed.
Q    Thanks, Josh.
MR. EARNEST:  Alexis.
Q    Josh, I have two quick questions.  Just to follow up -- when you were talking about Iran earlier, you said those back-channel conversations talked about shared interests and plans.  So can you describe what you mean when you say there’s been no coordination?  What’s the definition of coordination if we’ve discussed plans?
MR. EARNEST:  A lot of questions about definitions the last couple of briefings.
Q    Well, there’s good reason.
MR. EARNEST:  For good reason, that’s right.  I think what I’m trying to convey to you is that there is a reason for us to have conversations with Iran on this topic because we do have a shared interest in degrading and ultimately destroying ISIL. 
It is not in the interest of Iran for this extremist group to be wreaking havoc within the boundaries of its neighboring country.  So we do have a shared interest, and that shared interest has been discussed.
The President has already ordered military action in pursuit of protecting American citizens in Iraq.  And the President has indicated that he’s ready to order additional military action to accomplish our goal of degrading and ultimately destroying ISIL.  I think the reasonable question that people have is, given Iran’s significant military capability and given their significant interest in the outcome here, is the United States going to coordinate with Iran as we move forward on this military strategy.  The answer to that is, no, we are not.
Q    So a separate question -- because the President dealt with Congress last year slightly differently than the way he’s dealing with them now -- this is the texture of my question.  And because of the language for the training and arming, the expansiveness of the language presented to Congress, I wanted to clarify, does the President believe it’s responsible to ask Congress to vote on this without knowing about the broader coalition?  The sequencing is, approve it now and we’ll tell you about the coalition later.  Is that responsible?
MR. EARNEST:  Yes, it is.  The reason is simply that the President believes it is a priority for the administration to be given the authority it needs to begin training and equipping, ramping up our assistance to Syrian opposition fighters.  We’re doing that principally because the President believes we need boots on the ground to take the fight to ISIL in Syria.  The President is determined that those boots will not be American boots that are on the ground.
So we need to make sure that we are improving the ability and expanding the capacity of Syrian fighters to take the fight to ISIL in their own country.  We have already secured commitments from regional governments.  Some of those commitments have been discussed publicly; the Saudis, for instance, have acknowledged their willingness to host some of those training activities.
But as I mentioned earlier, if there are specific members of Congress that have questions about what this Title 10 authority would entail or what this program would include, we’re happy to have conversations with them about that because the President believes this is really a top priority. 
Yes, I’ll give you the last one, ma’am.
Q    Thank you very much, Josh.
MR. EARNEST:  You’re welcome.
Q    I have two questions, quick questions.  One, first, did the United States ask South Korea for any financial support to use against IS?  The second question is, National Security Advisor Susan Rice have a meeting with South Korean National Security Advisor Kim Kwan-jin.  Do you have any readout of the meeting?
MR. EARNEST:  I don’t have any readout of that meeting.  I know that it’s occurring today.  I’d encourage you to consult with my National Security Council colleagues who may be able to provide you some more information about that meeting. 
As it relates to South Korea and their contribution to the effort against ISIL, I’m not aware of any conversations that are occurring, but you should ask my National Security Council colleagues about whether or not that came up in the context of the meeting that the National Security Advisor is having today with her South Korean counterpart. 
Thanks very much, everybody.  Have a good one.
END

	1:08 P.M. EDT
The White House
Office of the Press Secretary
James S. Brady Press Briefing Room
1:41 P.M. EDT
MR. EARNEST:  Good afternoon, everybody.  I apologize for the lengthy delay in advance of today’s briefing.  A lot of news to get through.  So since there’s so much going on, Julie, why don’t we just go straight to questions?
Q    Great.  Thanks, Josh.  The President said in his interview over the weekend that the strategy that he’ll announce for going after the Islamic State is going to look like a counterterrorism campaign.  Can you explain a bit more what that means?
MR. EARNEST:  Well, what the President also mentioned in his interview is his intention to give a speech on Wednesday to discuss some of these issues.  So I don’t want to get ahead of that speech.  But let me try to give you a sense of at least what the President is thinking when he says something like that.
As the President confronts the situation and the threat that’s posed by ISIL, he puts the safety and security of the American people at the top of his list of concerns.  And the actions that he has ordered thus far in Iraq to strike ISIL is principally motivated to protect American personnel, including at our embassy and our consulate in Iraq.  That’s the focal point of our operations. 
Now, there are some other objectives that we’re also pursuing in terms of providing some humanitarian assistance to those religious and ethnic minorities that are being targeted by ISIL.  There also are some specific counterterrorism operations that we’re engaged in there, as we have been for some time. 
But when the President is making these decisions, particularly as it relates to an organization like ISIL, what he’s focused on is the safety and security of the American people.  And the threat that this extremist organization principally poses to the homeland is in the form of foreign fighters, individuals with Western passports that have traveled to the region and taken up arms to fight alongside ISIL.  There is significant concern about the idea that some of these individuals may try to travel back to the West using their Western passports and carry out acts of violence or engage in terrorism here. 
So as it relates to our principal concern about the threat that’s posed by ISIL, the President is concerned about the threat of terrorism.  And that is why the other counterterrorism operations that this administration has carried are a relevant reference point. 
One of the other things that the President mentioned in his interview is that we have seen the United States effectively, under the leadership of this President, and thanks to the courage and service of men and women in uniform and the intelligence agencies, we’ve worked very effectively to defeat terrorists who pose a threat to the United States.  That is true of the success of our efforts to decimate al Qaeda core in the border region and along the border between Afghanistan and Pakistan.  It’s also true in some of the counterterrorism efforts that you’ve seen the administration and the President order in Yemen, in Somalia and other places.
So what the President is trying to do is trying to illustrate that there is a track record here that people can evaluate.  And each of these situations is different, and we’ll have to consider each of them differently.  But in terms of evaluating what the President’s chief concern is and what our solution looks like, it is similar to some of these other counterterrorism missions that the President has ordered and have been successfully executed by the United States military and with the support and in conjunction with our allies around the world, and of course the support of American intelligence agencies.
Q    You mentioned some of the counterterrorism missions.  People often think about this in the context of Yemen, Pakistan, Somalia, which tend to be missions that are kind of shrouded in secrecy.  The administration in some cases doesn’t even acknowledge that these are happening.  That’s not what the President is talking about here, though, when he talks about counterterrorism, right?
MR. EARNEST:  Well, the President has been engaged in an effort -- and he gave a speech on this earlier this year -- his desire and our collective effort to try to bring some more transparency to some of these issues.
Q    But you get my point.  I mean, that’s one type of counterterrorism mission.  That’s not the type of mission he appears to be talking about here, though, right?
MR. EARNEST:  Well, each of these situations is a little bit different, and each of them has their own unique threat.  I mean, I guess what I would say is the President has been pretty clear about what he’s contemplating.  The President is not contemplating the deployment of combat boots on the ground into Iraq or Syria to deal with this situation.  He’s talking about building a broader, international coalition, engaging regional governments, looking for the support and the effective governance of the Iraqi central government to confront this threat.
Is it possible that there might be some clandestine efforts that are also underway here?  I’m sure that that’s the case, and I’m sure that’s something that I won’t be in a position to talk about if they do occur.  But what the President is talking about is something that he’s laid out a couple of time and will have the opportunity to talk about at more length on Wednesday.
Q    Has he made a decision on whether airstrikes should extend into Syria?
MR. EARNEST:  What the President has said is he -- and he said this, again, in the interview that he conducted over the week -- is his willingness to go wherever is necessary to strike those who are threatening America.  And that has been true in a range of other circumstances.  To the extent that there are parallels here, the President ordered this military to go after Osama bin Laden in Pakistan.  And that was sort of the President fulfilling a campaign promise that he made in a speech -- I believe was in the summer of 2007 -- where he talked about his commitment as Commander-in-Chief to deploying American resources wherever necessary to protect the American people.  And I think that is a useful guideline as you try to assess the President’s thinking about some of these issues. 
Q    To play that out -- if he’s willing to go after groups that threaten Americans wherever they are, and you say ISIS could pose a threat to Americans, and they’re in Syria, has he then made a decision to go after them inside Syria?
MR. EARNEST:  Well, if the President has made a decision along these lines, I’m sure that’s a decision that would rise to the level of the President making the announcement about that decision.  But what I’m trying to do is provide you some insight into the President’s thinking on this issue.  And I don’t know if I was successful in that effort, but it certainly was a valiant effort.
Jeff.
Q    Josh, the President also said in his interview that he did not believe he needed further authorization for action on this plan, but he’s also been very clear that this is a long-term thing.  So how do those two elements jive?  If this is going to go on for more than just a couple months, what does he need from Congress?
MR. EARNEST:  Well, the administration has demonstrated in a pretty transparent way our commitment to closely consulting with members of Congress as we pursue these kinds of foreign policy/national security priorities.  The President has convened a couple of meetings with leaders in Congress to discuss these issues before they went away on their August recess six weeks or so ago. 
The President has invited the four leaders of Congress -- the Democratic and Republican leader of both the House and the Senate -- to come to the White House tomorrow to discuss some of these issues and to follow up on the very successful NATO Summit that the President attended in Wales at the end of last week.  So the President is committed to intensive consultations between the administration and Congress as we consider some of these very difficult and very high-stakes questions. 
In addition to that, I think the President has long believed -- and this is something that the President has articulated in different -- as he’s confronted different national security questions.  The President believes that when the American people, through their elected representatives, can demonstrate a united front across party lines, that that’s beneficial to our foreign policy; that that sends a clear signal to people all around the world that the American people are united in pursuing and accomplishing a specific foreign policy or national security priority.
So the President, in his interview with Chuck Todd at NBC, was clear that he does believe that he has the authority to “do what’s necessary to protect the American people.”  But he went on to say, “I do think it’s important for Congress to understand what the plan is, to have buy-in, to debate it, and that’s why we’ve been consulting with Congress throughout.”
So there will continue to be an effort to keep an open line of dialogue between the administration and leaders in Congress as we move on this important foreign policy priority.
Q    So dialogue, but no need to ask for authorization.  Is that a correct understanding of that?
MR. EARNEST:  Well, I think the way the President described it is he believed that it was important to understand what the plan is, to have buy-in, to debate it, and engage in the kinds of consultations that this administration is leading right now.  And that --
Q    Debate it does not mean vote on it.  I’m just clarifying if that’s what that means.
MR. EARNEST:  Well, the President is not in a position where he sets the legislative floor calendar for either the House or the Senate. 
Q    But he’s in a position of asking for them to authorize or not authorize.
MR. EARNEST:  Well, he’s not just in a position of asking, he’s also in a position of consulting and trying to be as candid as possible with leaders in Congress about what he’s contemplating and what the policy implications are of some of the decisions that he is prepared to make.  And it’s important in the mind of the President for Congress to be a partner in these decisions.  They have a solemn responsibility as the elected representatives of the American people to be engaged in this process.  But ultimately, it is the responsibility of the Commander-in-Chief to make the kinds of decisions related to our military that rest on the shoulders of the President.
Q    He also said that there might be a need for more resources.  Can you address what kind of money request or funding request he might end up submitting to Congress as well?
MR. EARNEST:  I don’t have any sort of any funding request to preview at this point.  I would remind you in a speech that I believe that you covered, Jeff, when the President traveled to West Point, he talked about his interest in the creation of this Counterterrorism Partnership Fund.  And this is a core component of the President’s strategy for dealing with this and other issues like it around the globe.  That is additional resources that can be used by the United States to build up effective partners so that when the United States has to confront threats like this, that we have well-trained, well-equipped, effective partners that we can work with to confront these problems.
Ultimately, we need to get into a position where the United States is not solely responsible for dealing with these kinds of emerging threats; that we want to be able to work closely with partners around the globe, partners who have better knowledge of the local politics, who have better knowledge of the local terrain, who in some cases can prevent some of these situations from becoming so urgent and so severe.  And that is one example of a funding request that the President has made to members of Congress that I think that members of Congress have talked about but have not voted on.  And the President would certainly like to see those kinds of resources be provided because it would strengthen the hand of this President and future Presidents for dealing with urgent situations like this.
Let’s move around just a little bit.  Zeke.
Q    Thanks, Josh.  You mentioned earlier the President’s longstanding commitment to counterterrorism operations -- one of them, but one the administration doesn’t like to talk about a lot was the assassination of Anwar al-Awlaki.  And given the administration talks a lot about the 100 American citizens who are fighting alongside ISIS and potentially could come back here and pose a threat here, I was wondering whether the President has sought out any sort of legal justification like he did in that case and is considering the use of -- using whether drone strikes or direct airstrikes on potentially American citizens?
MR. EARNEST:  Well, Zeke, I don’t have any sort of policy announcement to make along these lines.  I would point out the administration has sought, at the President’s direction, to try to provide additional insight to the American public and to working journalists about the legal justification and the decision that was made to strike threats in Somalia and Yemen. 
But as it relates to ISIL more generally, we are concerned about the threat that is posed by these foreign fighters.  There are -- it is believed by some analysts that there are dozens of individuals with American passports who have traveled to the region and taken up arms to fight alongside ISIL.  Now, there are some reports that indicate that there is a risk that those individuals could return to the West, whether it’s the United States or one of our allies, using their Western American passport to travel either completely unimpeded or relatively unimpeded in a way that poses a threat to the American people.  And the President will not hesitate to take the actions that he believes are necessary to protect the American people.
Q    And following up there, there’s potential legislation on Capitol Hill in terms of either stripping citizenship or taking action on passports of Americans who are serving -- who are fighting alongside ISIL.  Is that a measure we can expect to hear more from the President about on Wednesday?  And is that something he would support?
MR. EARNEST:  I’ve read about some of those proposals; I haven’t looked at them specifically.  I don’t think that we’ve taken a position on them at this point.  But as I mentioned to Jeff, the administration certainly is interested in working in a partnership with members of Congress, Democrats and Republicans, as we confront this threat.
Viqueira.
Q    Thank you, Josh.  The President wants to degrade and destroy ISIL, but he doesn’t want to put boots on the ground.
MR. EARNEST:  American combat boots on the ground.
Q    American combat boots on the ground.  Yesterday, in response to Chuck Todd of NBC News --
MR. EARNEST:  I’ve heard of that guy.
Q    -- the President -- Chuck asked him, well, who is going to go into Syria, and the President said Syrians like the Free Syrian Army are going to occupy that space -- assuming the President is successful in pushing ISIL back from its Syrian strongholds.  The Free Syrian Army, the administration has been reluctant to arm them all along; you’ve been reluctant to allow countries like Saudi Arabia to send them shoulder-launched ground-to-air missiles, the MANPADS.  Some of the equipment that has been transferred to them has reportedly shown up in ISIS hands in Iraq, fighting against American, Kurdish and Iraqi forces.  Why is the Free Syrian Army now a more viable and trustworthy fighting force than it was just a few months ago?
MR. EARNEST:  Well, there is one aspect of your question that I want to quibble with just a little bit, which is that we have for more than a year now been providing both non-military and military support.
Q    Lethal military support?
MR. EARNEST:  We’ve been providing military support is the term of our --
Q    But I’m assuming now you’re going to provide them with lethal military support if they’re going to be actually carrying a fight as a proxy for this coalition.
MR. EARNEST:  Well, I’ll get to that.  Let’s start with that it’s important for people to understand that support from the Obama administration has been flowing to the moderate Syrian opposition for more than a year now, and that includes military support.  The President has sought -- and this was in the context of the West Point speech that I mentioned in response to Jeff’s question a little bit earlier -- the administration has sought additional resources, using our Title 10 authority, to ramp up that assistance to the Syrian opposition.  And that certainly would, we would hope and expect, improve their capacity and success in taking the fight to the Assad regime and to ISIL to essentially -- or to effectively wage that battle on behalf of the citizens of their country to try to retake their country.  So there is an effort that has been underway for some time.  We have, as you point out, sought to increase or ramp up that assistance. 
Now, the question you’re asking though is a somewhat more complicated one, which is the question is, why?  Why them, right?
Q    And why now?
MR. EARNEST:  And why now.
Q    And who else?
MR. EARNEST:  And who else.  So I guess you have three complicated questions.  (Laughter.) 
Q    Well, I mean, you were just -- to point out there are no American boots on the ground.  So who are the boots on the ground?
MR. EARNEST:  I was, I was.  I’m not suggesting -- it’s complicated but not illegitimate.  Why them?  It’s their country.  Again, the President -- I think the President, again, in the interview that we’re all citing, described it as a profound mistake to commit American combat boots to being on the ground in Syria.  This is not a fight that the United States can take on for them.  The United States is willing to be supportive of the Syrian opposition as they try to put in place a government that reflects the will of the Syrian people, and we’re going to continue to support them.
Q    It was their country three years ago.  Three years later, 162,000 people are dead, there are millions of refugees all over the region.  Again, why not then?  Why wasn’t it effectuated back then?
MR. EARNEST:  Well, I would say, again, a couple of things about that.  The first is the United States has been engaged in an effort to support them, and we have been for some time -- for more than a year, at least.  Separately, the concern that was expressed by the administration at the time and has been -- is something that’s been often repeated, is a concern that we didn’t want to provide assistance to every individual who said that they were fighting Bashar al-Assad.  Had we done that without thoroughly vetting them and building the kind of relationship that’s necessary to understand who we’re providing weapons to, we would have inadvertently provided weapons to the very people we’re now fighting in Iraq.
So there was a question of who exactly was included in the Syrian opposition, and which of those elements were interested in putting in place a government that actually reflected the will and diversity of the Syrian people, and which of those were members of the opposition who were actually extremists, who were hoping to use the power vacuum that’s been created by this civil war in Syria to try to carry out their own vision of an Islamic caliphate in this region.
So the reason that the administration was interested in carefully vetting the individuals who were part of the Syrian opposition is because we wanted to make sure that our assistance was landing in the hands of the people who were trying to create a government that reflected the will of the Syrian people and not to create an Islamic caliphate that was carrying out acts of violence throughout the region.
So this challenge of vetting the opposition certainly contributed to the policy of this administration to ramp up our assistance to that opposition over time after we had established some relationships and had the opportunity to vet these individuals and get a better sense about what their intentions actually were.
Jon.
Q    Josh, Jeff asked you a series of very direct questions and I didn’t hear a direct answer.  So can you just --
MR. EARNEST:  I’ll try again.  (Laughter.)
Q    Please help me with a yes or no.
MR. EARNEST:  I’ll try.
Q    Does the President intend to ask Congress for authorization to expand his campaign against ISIL?  Just a yes or no?
MR. EARNEST:  The President was asked this direction question and he --
Q    Didn’t give a direct answer either.  (Laughter.)  So I’m asking if you can give me, seriously, a yes or no.  Because I don’t know what buy-in -- I covered Congress for years; I don’t know what you mean by you saying you want to have congressional buy-in.  Buy-in, it seems to me, would imply a vote of some kind, either a vote on appropriations or a vote on an authorization or a sense of Congress resolution, but some kind of a vote.  Is that what you want from Congress -- a vote on this?  Yes or no?
MR. EARNEST:  Well, again, if you want to get some insight into the President’s current thinking about this, then I would refer you to the answer that he gave to Chuck in the interview 48 hours ago.  But the other thing that I would point out that’s also part of your question is if the President decides to expand the operation.  And these are the kinds of questions that are best answered after the President has made some fundamental decisions about what he wants to do there -- that if there is an expansion in the operation that takes place, what consequences are there for a whole range of things:  for our diplomatic relationships, what kind of assistance are we going to seek from our partners; what kind of assistance would we seek from regional governments in terms of the role that they could play here; and what role does Congress have. 
So it’s hard to -- unless we’re talking about a very specific order from the President, it’s hard to talk in very specific terms about what we want Congress to do.
But as a general matter, what I can say is that the President is interesting in their buy-in, is interested in a congressional debate, and is interested in consulting closely with the leaders in Congress so that they feel bought into this process and they feel like the partners that they actually are, as the elected representatives to the American people.
Q    Because we remember that the President did make a decision on airstrikes on Syria under very different circumstances but previously, and his decision at that point was that he needed congressional authorization or that he wanted congressional authorization.  If he were to go in that direction again and decide that some kind of an extended air campaign against ISIL targets in Syria were necessary, is it safe to assume he would have the same view that he would need, want congressional authorization?
MR. EARNEST:  Well, the situation from last year is a little bit different than the situation this year; that the situation from last year was related specifically to this issue of chemical weapons being used by the Assad regime against the Syrian people.  The situation right now is related directly to the protection of American citizens in the region.  The President does believe that he has all the authority necessary as the Commander-in-Chief of the United States to order the kind of military action that’s necessary to protect American citizens.
Q    Including strikes in Syria?
MR. EARNEST:  But again, if there is an expansion of the President’s military orders, or if there is an expansion of the scope of operations that the President is willing to consider, at the point that the President has made that decision we can start making decisions about what sort of congressional role or authorization is required, if any.
Q    Give me a sense on the timeline for a decision on this.  Is this something the President is considering right now?  I mean, is this something we should expect in the next day or two, or is this something over a course of weeks?
MR. EARNEST:  When you say “this” --
Q    The decision on whether or not to expand military operations that you just referred to.
MR. EARNEST:  Well, the President has been regularly consulting with his national security team for weeks now.  And when they are having these meetings, they’re talking about our broader strategy for confronting the threat that’s posed by ISIL.  And there are a range of elements that we’ve discussed quite a few times here in terms of our diplomacy with the Iraqis trying to form a central government.  They’ve made tremendous progress on that over the next last couple weeks, and we’re hoping that this week they’ll make some additional important progress in forming a cabinet.
There’s important work that’s being done by the Secretary of State.  He’s traveling to the region this week where he’s going to be consulting with regional governments.  I think the President was pretty powerful in explaining the role that these governments in the region have and the stake that they have in resolving this conflict. 
The President highlighted that so often these Sunni-dominated governments perceive Shia-led governments as the principal threat to their ability to lead their country and to remain in power.  It’s the President’s view -- and I think that there is some justification for this based on the facts that we see on the ground there -- that they actually face a great threat from more extremist Sunni elements that have demonstrated significant capacity to wreak havoc in their region.
There’s also a diplomatic effort to engage the international community here.  There are a number of intelligence efforts that the President has already ordered.  We’ve talked quite a bit about how the President at the beginning of this situation ordered an increase in intelligence assets to get a better sense of what sort of -- to get a better sense of what actually was happening on the ground and to better assess the capability of both ISIL but also the Iraqi security forces.  But also, as you point out, the other element of this strategy is the use of military force.  That is part of the strategy. 
But the reason I’m running through this long list here is to illustrate to you that there are -- that this broad strategy that the President has put in place to deal with this is something that is regularly discussed among his team.  And they’re discussing every element of this strategy at each of these meetings. 
Q    But in his speech on Wednesday -- and first of all, is this a primetime address or a daytime speech? 
MR. EARNEST:  We’re still working through the logistics of the speech that the President wants to give.  And so once we have some more details on that, we’ll let you know.
Q    But is the purpose of the speech to announce a new phase in this military operation, or to outline what he has already outlined in different venues -- the interview over the weekend, the press conferences on his last trip -- what his strategy is vis-à-vis ISIL?
MR. EARNEST:  Well, the speech isn’t written yet, so I don’t want to get ahead of describing a speech that hasn’t been written yet.  But generally --
Q    But trying to go forward, is the purpose to explain what he’s already doing or to announce something new?
MR. EARNEST:  Well, I wouldn’t rule out that there might be something new in the speech.  But the principal goal here is to make sure that people understand what the clear stake is for the American people and our nation in this ongoing violence that we’re seeing in Iraq and Syria.  He also wants to describe what sort of tools are at the disposal of the American government as they try to protect our interests and our people in the region.
And the President wants to try to lay that out pretty clearly.  Does that mean the President may have something new to say in the speech?  He might.  But I’ll wait until the speech is written before I start guessing about where he’s going to end up.
Major.
Q    Josh, when you were asked a moment ago, has the President decided to expand the air war into Syria, you said the President said he will go wherever is necessary.  That sounded like a very near confirmation that he has decided that.  Should that be interpreted that way?
MR. EARNEST:  No -- because if the President has made a specific decision like this to expand our military operations, then you can expect that the President himself would announce a decision like that, not just little old me here. 
Q    How should we interpret your answer that he’ll go wherever is necessary?
MR. EARNEST:  That is a statement of the President’s view in terms of what sort of authority he has as the Commander-in-Chief to confront these challenges.  And the President is determined to act where necessary to protect American citizens both in the region, but here in the homeland.  And the President has demonstrated a willingness to do that on a number of occasions already, and that principle continues to apply in this situation, as well.
Q    So it’s not a matter of whether, it’s just a matter of timing?
MR. EARNEST:  Well, again, if and when the President has made a decision along these lines, it will be something that the President will announce.
Q    Is that the purpose of Wednesday’s speech?
MR. EARNEST:  No, the purpose of the President’s speech on Wednesday is broader than that.  Again, military action is one element of our strategy, and the President does have this integrated strategy that relies very heavily on America’s forceful diplomatic might and a range of other assets that we have at our disposal.  And the President is going to use all of them to deal with this specific challenge.
Q    So let’s just say, for the sake of argument, I was an American who watched the President’s press conference at the end of the NATO Summit and watched the interview yesterday.  After seeing Wednesday’s speech, will I say to myself, wow, there’s like 70 percent brand new?  Or is it going to be like -- (laughter) --
MR. EARNEST:  That is a particularly creative way to ask that question.  I think what I would say is I would encourage that American citizen that you’re describing to tune into the speech and evaluate for themselves to see how surprised they are by the President’s remarks.
Q    Come on, you can give us something better.
MR. EARNEST:  At this point, I can’t.  It’s a little early for that.
Q    I mean, you more or less said to Jonathan it’s mostly going to be what we’ve heard before; there might be something new.  I mean, is it to try to gather the American people’s attention and say, in case you haven't heard -- (laughter) -- here’s what I’m thinking about, here’s the context, but this isn’t the declarative speech on how I’m going to ratchet up this conflict to a higher military level, and I need Congress to approve it, and here’s how much it’s going to cost, and here’s the timeline I’ve sort of put together to envision achieving goals X,Y and Z?
MR. EARNEST:  We’re still a couple days away from the speech, and so I’m not in a position to provide additional guidance to you right now of what the President may or may not say.  So we’ll have the opportunity to try this again tomorrow and maybe I’ll be prepared with a little bit more to say about this.
Look, the President and his team are working on the speech as we speak.  So as we get some more details locked down, I will try -- I’m probably over-committing myself now -- but I will try to provide at least a little bit greater insight for you and your viewers about what the President intends to talk about on Wednesday.
Q    I want to follow up on immigration for a second, because I just want to be clear -- what the President decided Saturday was that he wouldn’t take any executive action until after the November election, right?  Or has he decided to revisit the entire question of taking executive action until after the election?  Because to my mind, and many advocates who have been pushing for this, they are very different things.
MR. EARNEST:  I appreciate you giving me the opportunity to clarify this -- to the extent that there is any ambiguity here.  The President has decided that he will take executive action within the confines of the law to fix those aspects of the broken immigration system that he’s able to fix before the end of the year.  And that is a decision that he has made, and that is something that will occur.
Now, some of the static that you might say in the media over the weekend was related to the President’s earlier commitment to acting before the end of the summer.  What the President has decided is that he will act now before the end of the year.  The President has not in any way altered his commitment or interest in taking executive action -- again, within the confines of the law -- to solve to act where Congress hasn’t, and more specifically, to act where congressional Republicans have blocked congressional action.  And the President’s commitment to acting on this before the end of the year has not changed.
Q    He said yesterday that the reason for that is he needs to explain it to the American people.  Why does he need until the end of the year to explain something?  Isn’t it true that the dominant factor -- if you want to call it static -- was static from Senate Democrats saying this is a -- maybe you think it’s a good idea, but it’s terrible politics for us and we want you to wait until after the election?  The President clearly doesn’t need nine weeks to explain this to the American people.  If he wanted to explain it, he could explain it -- just like he’s going to try to explain the strategy on Wednesday.  It seems to me the only rational explanation for this is an intervening midterm election and fears from Senate Democrats that they did not want to take this issue on in the teeth of an already tough political environment.
MR. EARNEST:  Major, the reason that the President has made the decision to delay his announcement about executive actions that he’s going to take is specifically because he is concerned mostly about ensuring the solution that he offers is both sustainable and enduring.
Q    But if it’s an executive action, it is sustainable by definition until the end of his presidency.  He doesn’t have to worry about Congress.  That’s the whole point.
MR. EARNEST:  What the President wants to do is he wants to ensure that all of the work that has been done over the last several years to build this powerful bipartisan coalition in support of immigration reform is sustained.  And by injecting an executive action in the midst of this hyper-partisan, hyper-political environment shortly before the midterms, that will have a negative impact on the broader public support and on the sustainability of immigration reform.
So I guess the short answer to your question is, the President is willing to take a little political heat from the pundits, from some of the advocates in the Hispanic community in particular, in order to ensure that the policy that he puts forward is one that can be sustained.  And the fact is we haven't seen a similar willingness from congressional Republicans to take a little heat to do what’s in the best interest of the country.  In fact, we’ve seen congressional Republicans do exactly the opposite.  They’ve been in a situation where they don’t want to take any political heat, even though they know that acting on bipartisan immigration reform would create jobs, it would expand economic growth, it would reduce the deficit.  That’s why it’s strongly supported by the faith community, by the law enforcement community, by the business community, by the labor community. 
These are all reasons why comprehensive immigration reform should move forward.  That’s why it passed with bipartisan support in the Senate.  But there is a small but vocal group among congressional Republicans in the House of Representatives who are blocking this kind of reform.  And that’s the only reason we’re having this question right now.
Q    So not doing what he said he was going to do on the timeline, he said he was going to do it as an act of courage.
MR. EARNEST:  Well, what the President has done -- I mean, look, Major, it’s a not a surprise to anybody at the White House, or it certainly isn’t a surprise to me -- I won’t speak for my colleagues -- it’s not a surprise to me that there were some people in the newspaper over the weekend who were critical of the President’s decision to announce these executive actions before the end of the year as opposed to the end of the summer.  That criticism was not a surprise; that criticism was anticipated.  But the President is willing to take on that criticism so that we can ensure that the executive action that the President takes is sustained, that it’s enduring, and that we continue to have public support for it.
Look, for all the disagreement that there may be around this one issue, there should be no disputing the fact that injecting this issue into the current political environment would be really bad for the issue.  There’s some disagreement about whether or not, well, maybe it would help some Democrats, maybe it would hurt some others, maybe it would galvanize base Democratic voters, maybe it would energize Latino supporters, maybe it would provoke Republican candidates into doing outrageous things like shutting down the government in a way that would benefit Democrats.  There are a lot of people with a lot of different views about what possible impact this could have on individual races.  But there is no arguing about the fact that injecting this issue into this sharply political, polarized environment would be bad for the issue. 
And the President believes ultimately that that’s the most important thing -- that making progress on this issue is the most important thing.  No one in Washington, D.C. has invested more in trying to get this done than President Barack Obama.  And if that means the President has to take on a little bit more heat here for a few weeks until we announce our decision in order to make it more likely that these solutions will be enduring and sustained and successful, the President is happy to take on that heat in order to get that done.
Let’s move around a little bit.  Justin.
Q    I guess I wanted to just follow on that and maybe argue with the idea that --
MR. EARNEST:  That’s why we’re here.  (Laughter.)
Q    -- that injecting that into the current political climate is bad for the issue.  I mean, we just went through a year of you guys saying time and again that House Republicans haven't moved on the issue, it seems legislatively dead in every possible way.  And so the only X factor out here seems to be control of the Senate.  So I’m wondering if you can maybe explain explicitly why an executive action would make -- if it were to come this week, would be less enduring than one that happens five weeks from now -- if it’s not what I think we’re all dancing around, which is that it helps Senate Democrats to retain control of the chamber.
MR. EARNEST:  The reason that immigration reform over the last five years has made so much progress --
Q    Has it made progress?
MR. EARNEST:  Well, it passed the Senate with bipartisan support.  We got 14 Republicans to vote for it, and every single Democrat in the Senate voted for it.  We also know -- although we haven't tested the proposition -- but I think everybody in here -- let me know if you disagree -- but I think everybody is willing to stipulate that if this legislation that passed through the Senate in bipartisan fashion were put on the floor of the House of Representatives, that it would also pass with bipartisan support, with a bipartisan majority, the President would certainly sign it.  
That’s evidence of significant progress.  I mean, it’s not ancient history to cite the experience of 2006 where you had Democrats and Republicans on both sides of the issue reluctant to engage in a debate about it, let alone reluctanct to vote for it. 
So we have made a lot of progress over the last five years.  The reason for that I think is twofold.  The first is, it’s become clear what the facts are. The facts are that it would be good for job creation.  It would be good for economic growth, it would reduce the deficit.  So the facts are clear about why Congress should take action on this.
The second thing is, a lot of very difficult work was done between Democrats and Republicans to try to find some common ground.  That is harder than it’s ever been in this town.  But thanks to the dutiful efforts of members of this administration, Democrats and Republicans in the Senate, they brokered some common-sense common ground and cobbled together a legislative proposal that would do a lot of good for the country.  It meant that neither side got every single thing that they wanted, but they were able to arrive at a piece of legislation that everybody acknowledges would be really good for the country.
So there is painstaking work that was put into striking that compromise.  Now, what we have also seen in the context of these midterm elections is a pretty gross distortion about the facts of our immigration system.
Q    So that’s going to change after the midterm elections?
MR. EARNEST:  Well, what will change is that we’ll be past it.  I don’t think any of the Republican candidates --
Q    (Inaudible.)
MR. EARNEST:  Well, but listen -- think about it, Justin.  I don’t think any of the Republican candidates right now are contemplating a six-figure ad buy the third week in November.  Are they?  If they are, I hope they’ll spend their money that way, but they’re not going to.  So the tone and heightened nature of the debate will just be different.  Will there still be Republicans who are against common-sense immigration reform?  Yes.  I readily concede that that’s the case.  But will they be in less of a position to distort the facts about what that position actually is?  Yes, I think they will.
Q    Well, why does that affect the sustainability of the President’s eventual --
MR. EARNEST:  Because the reason that the President feels confident about -- well, let me take that in two ways.  The first is we want to preserve the strong public support that currently exists for immigration reform; that we have worked hard in painstaking fashion to cobble together this coalition of Democrats and Republicans in Washington, D.C. and business leaders and labor leaders and faith leaders and leaders in the law enforcement community all across the country in support of this proposal. 
But by injecting it into the highly charged political debate six or eight weeks before the midterm elections is to subject this issue to gross distortion and partisanship that could alter that balance.  And we don’t want to do that.  And that means the President is willing to take on a little heat and be criticized by -- certainly by Republicans, but even by members of his own party in order to protect the issue -- because ultimately that is the goal.  We’ve said for quite some time that the President’s goal here is solving problems and not playing politics.
Q    Just to square the last circle in this maybe, why is this diffused as an issue if, as you just said maybe 15 minutes ago, you’re pledging to take this executive action by the end of the year?  Why aren’t we going to see a six-figure ad buy from a Republican going up against a vulnerable Democrat, saying the President not only is still going to do this but now he’s playing politics to hook the issue.  Have you really diffused this or taken this out of the political discussion?  Or have you just kind of punted it and kept it alive as an issue but now people aren’t kind of getting the relief that they would otherwise?
MR. EARNEST:  I think there is a difference between the President indicating a willingness to act and -- or a commitment to act even, and actually announcing what that action is.  I think that there is a tangible difference there in a way that will reduce the amount of incoming, if you will, that the issue will take.  And I think that’s ultimately what’s driving this decision.
Olivier.
Q    Thank you, Josh.  I’ve got a couple for you.  The first is that the last sentence in the latest War Powers letter that the President sent to the Congress says, “I appreciate the support of the Congress in this action.”  How and where was that support here expressed?
MR. EARNEST:  Well, I think that we’ve seen a number of public comments from Democrats and Republicans indicating that they support the decisions that the President has made to order military action in Iraq to protect American citizens there.
Q    But that’s not Congress speaking as -- I mean, he didn’t say, I thank some Republicans and Democrats.  He is explicitly assuming full congressional support for what he’s done, right?
MR. EARNEST:  I don’t have the War Powers report notification in front of me.  If you want to read it to me again, I --
Q    “I appreciate the support of the Congress in this action.”  Does he consider the leadership to be sufficient?  I mean, I’m getting back to this whole notion of a vote or not a vote, obviously, but he seems to be assuming it.
MR. EARNEST:  Well, we have seen public comments from rank-and-file Democrats and Republicans as well that indicate their support for the President’s decision to order military action to protect American citizens in Iraq.  But I’m willing to stipulate that, yes, they have not voted on this at this point, and voting on it is different than them talking about it.  But in terms of them articulating support that the President appreciates, we’ve seen many Democrats and Republicans do that.
Q    So in the past couple weeks we’ve had senior officials say -- I think one on CNN and some elsewhere -- that this conflict to degrade and destroy the Islamic State could run three years or more.  And we had news over the weekend of airstrikes on targets that I don’t understand how it fits the President’s contention that this is a mission about safeguarding the security of American personnel and installations in Iraq when you’re striking targets like IS around the Haditha Dam, for example.  It seems like the President, for all his public comments about mission creep, is overseeing a fairly steady expansion of a conflict in scope and now in duration as well.  Is that an incorrect assessment?
MR. EARNEST:  It is.  The reason for that is that there is a direct threat that’s posed by ISIL taking control of the Haditha Dam to American personnel in Iraq.  There also is this broader effort to support the Iraqi security forces as they are engaged in taking the fight to ISIL.  That’s an example of our efforts to try to support them in a way that, again, safeguards the American citizens who are already there.
Q    What’s the direct threat to American personnel from --
MR. EARNEST:  Well, the way that it’s been described to me is that there is a threat that if ISIL decided to destroy the Haditha Dam, that it could threaten -- or would threaten the airport downstream from the dam.  I’m told that that was true of Mosul Dam, as well, and is true in this case.
Move around a little bit.  Jared.
Q    Josh, when you’re talking about the -- and I want to follow up on Olivier -- because the buy-in phrase sounds squirrely.  When you’re talking about buy-in, it sounds like you’re going to give Congress just enough authority, just enough of a role to agree with the administration’s position but not enough to say no.  Does the administration intend to give Congress a role to shape policy about ISIS, to shape policy and action?  Or is it just to buy into the administration’s position?
MR. EARNEST:  Well, I would say, Jared, that the level of consultation that this administration has demonstrated a commitment to indicates our genuine interest in a dialogue with members of Congress about our policy in Iraq and Syria, and our policy more broadly for confronting ISIL.  I think that is evidenced by the fact that we’re having continuous conversations.  Some of the conversations have occurred before the President has made important decisions.  There have been regular consultation from the Department of Defense and the Department of State, other senior members of the President’s team here at the White House.
So there has been intensive consultation, and that is evidence of our genuine interest in members of Congress partnering with this administration as we develop a policy to degrade and ultimately destroy ISIL and to protect American citizens in Iraq.
Q    But when you’re talking about buy-in, buy-in kind of exists in this rhetorical gray area, where it’s not quite a vote so you don’t have them shaping policy -- at least, again, you haven’t clarified it, despite getting several questions about it.  It doesn’t seem like it’s quite so far as negotiating on policy, negotiating on strategy and voting on it.  So it’s just enough responsibility for Congress to maybe share some of the blame if something were to go wrong or if something were to happen, but not enough to actually say no to the President’s policies.  Is any member of Congress going to get the ability to say no to the President’s policy to fight ISIS in Syria or Iraq?
MR. EARNEST:  Jared, it is the responsibility of the Commander-in-Chief to make decisions about the use of our military to protect American citizens.  The President believes that he has all of the authorization that is required to make those kinds of decisions.
That said, we welcome Congress as a partner as we confront some of these very difficult and high-stakes national security issues.  And if Congress wants to participate in this process, we certainly would welcome their participation in a constructive way.  But our level of engagement indicates our legitimate interest in congressional consultation and in congressional action that is contributing to this broader effort.
Q    But when you’re talking about if Congress wants to do this, it’s not like there’s a sign-up board.  They have a constitutional role here.  And obviously depending on whether it’s authorization or appropriations -- there are different rules for each aspect of this -- but you’re talking about something that sounds volitional.  Congress has a duty here.  Is the President trying to limit their duties as it goes against authorization or appropriation?
MR. EARNEST:  Of course not.  I’m merely stating the fact that the President is the Commander-in-Chief, and that means he is the one that is ultimately responsible for making decisions about ordering military action.  But you are right -- you’re saying something that I said early on in this briefing, which is that there is a role for Congress to play here.  And how they choose to play that role is obviously up to them.  They are a separate branch of government.  As I mentioned earlier, the President doesn’t make decisions about what pieces of legislation find their way to the floor of the House of Representatives.  It certainly would be a good thing in our view if the President did have some authority over that, but he doesn’t.  It certainly would allow us to confront some of the other problems that House Republicans have refused to vote on. 
But at the end of the day, we are interested in careful and close consultation with members of Congress in both parties, in both Houses of Congress, and we are interested in their buy-in, as the President described.
Q    But there’s no opposite to buy-in.
MR. EARNEST:  Excuse me?
Q    There’s no way for them to say no.  When you talk about buy-in, it’s one-directional.
MR. EARNEST:  Well, I guess I don’t understand what you mean, Jared.  I mean, again, if members of Congress want to put forward a piece of legislation saying the President should not act or should not order military force to protect American citizens in Iraq and Syria, they’re welcome to vote on that.  Again, the President won’t have a vote and the President doesn’t determine whether or not that goes onto the floor of the House of Representatives.  So Congress does have some volitional aspect to this.
We’ve been clear about what we would like them to do -- or at least a little clear.  But ultimately they’re allowed -- they obviously -- there are a variety of ways for them to demonstrate their support or opposition to this policy, and that can range from everything from an interview or a piece of legislation that they vote on, and a range of things in between, as you pointed out. 
So what I’m willing to say at this point is we are interested in members of Congress and Congress as an institution working closely with the President as he confronts these difficult challenges.  And the reason for that is really simple, Jared.  The reason is the President believes that our foreign policy is more forceful, it’s more impactful when we can demonstrate to the world that the United States of America is united in support of this priority.
Ed.
Q    Josh, a quick sidebar issue since the briefing started.  The Baltimore Ravens have announced they’ve terminated the contract of Ray Rice.  I realize you did not know that, but probably have seen or heard about this pretty dramatic, horrific video of him beating up his wife.  The President has spoken out on this issue a lot.  The Vice President I think today is having an issue -- an event about the passage of the Violence Against Women Act.  What kind of comment could the White House offer about this situation?
MR. EARNEST:  Well, I haven’t seen the news because of what you just said, but let me say it this way:  This administration and this President do believe strongly that the scourge of violence against women is something that needs to be aggressively combatted.  And I don’t want to comment on the individual decisions that are made by, in this case, an individual NFL team, but you have seen the President and the Vice President make very forceful public comments in talking about how important it is for men, in particular, to step up and step forward and make clear that violence against women is something that is not and cannot be tolerated, and that the most important thing -- or one of the most important things that we can do to try to end the scourge of violence against women is for men to ban together and to send a very clear signal that it is unacceptable for men to perpetrate acts of violence against women.  And we certainly welcome any strong signals by anyone in this country in support of that value.
Q    I want to go back to ISIS.  To try to put a finer point on what you’ve been asked several times, rather than trying to confirm if he is going -- get ahead of the President of what he’s specifically going to say, will he make decisions by Tuesday and Wednesday about expanding this campaign against ISIS so that he can present a plan first to the congressional leaders on Tuesday and then a plan, a strategy to the American people on Wednesday?
MR. EARNEST:  Well, I don’t want to foreshadow any specific presidential decisions, but the President is interested in having a genuine consultation with the congressional leaders who will be here tomorrow about what he believes is the best path forward for confronting the threat that’s posed by ISIL.  The President is interested in having a conversation with the American public about what sort of tools are at the disposal of the United States of America to confront this threat. Those tools include intelligence tools.  Those tools include the powerful diplomacy of the United States of America.  Those tools also include the potent arsenal of the United States military.  And all of those things can be brought to bear to confront this situation.
What’s most important for people to understand -- both the American people and for congressional leaders to understand -- is the President is steadfastly committed to ensuring that the United States is not taking this one alone.  And the President is going to use all of the tools of our diplomacy to ensure that we have a central Iraqi government that’s standing up and uniting that country to take the fight to ISIL in their own country; that we’re engaging nations in the region, particularly the Sunni-led nations in the region who have a very clear stake in this outcome.  And the President spent a lot of time at the NATO Summit at the end of last week talking to our allies in NATO about what role the international community can play to support this broader effort to confront, degrade, and ultimately destroy ISIL.
Q    A couple specifics.  A couple weeks ago, Peter asked you a question and you said the President was not referring to ISIS when he dismissed some terrorists in The New Yorker magazine as the JV squad.  The Washington Post, I believe last week, gave you four Pinocchios for that.
MR. EARNEST:  I saw that.
Q    The President yesterday went ahead -- glad you saw that -- the President yesterday went ahead and doubled down on it and said, I was not referring to ISIL, he said.  Why do you and the President continue to say something that has been proven to be false?
MR. EARNEST:  It’s not proven to be false.  I’m just going to go back to the -- I did this when Peter asked it, too, but let me just read what the President said.  The President was drawing distinction between core al Qaeda and a range of local groups.  What the President said is, “There is a distinction between the capacity and reach of a bin Laden and a network that is actively planning major terrorist plots against the homeland, versus jihadists who are engaged in various local power struggles and disputes, often sectarian.”
The point is the President was describing the wide variety of extremist groups that have sprouted up over the last several years in this region of the world.  Some of them have greater capabilities than others.  Some of them do not pose a threat to the homeland, or at least don’t have the capacity to plan what the President described as “major terrorist plots against the homeland.”
Q    Okay.  But David Remnick told PolitiFact -- the interview took place on January 7th -- that the President was referencing a specific event that had happened just days before -- January 3rd, when Islamic State raised this flag, took over Fallujah.  So in that interview, in that context, the President was referring to something -- I understand you’re making this more general.  But according to David Remnick, was saying -- he was referring in the interview to something that specifically happened four days before -- Islamic State taking over Fallujah.  So that sounds like a direct -- whether he used the name ISIS/ISIL, he was referring to an event from four days before where Islamic State took over Fallujah.
MR. EARNEST:  Ed, what the President was referring to was he was referring to jihadists who were engaged in various local power struggles and disputes, often sectarian.  The President was not singling out a specific group -- that’s why he described jihadists, plural; power struggles, plural; disputes, plural.  He is talking about the wide variety of groups and indicating that we don’t have to be worried about every single one of these groups.  Many of these groups aren’t particularly sophisticated, don’t have designs or the capability of attacking the United States homeland.  Some of them are more influential, some of them do have greater capacity, and some of them have built up and demonstrated that capacity over the last several months, like ISIL has.
But the fact is, at the time what the President was talking about is drawing a clear distinction between core al Qaeda and the wide variety of groups that are extremist organizations that are operating in this area.  Even ISIL, which has demonstrated some substantial military capacity as we’ve talked about, there are not indications right now that they are actively planning or that they have the capacity to carry out a widespread conspiracy along the lines of the plot that was organized by Osama bin Laden about 13 years ago this week.  Their capacities are different, and that’s the point that the President was trying to make.  It means that our policy for dealing with them needs to be different. 
And the President is putting in place a strategy to deal with the threat that is posed by ISIL before they can find the kind of safe haven that would allow them to eventually build the capacity to carry out the kind of terror attack that we saw that was carried out by Osama bin Laden.
Q    Janet Napolitano, the President’s former Homeland Security Secretary, said this morning that when she was in office, ISIS was on everybody’s radar screen.  She left office a year ago this month -- September 2013.  So was ISIS on the President’s radar screen at least a year ago?  And if so, why is he giving a big speech this week?  Why didn’t we get a strategy a year ago?  Six months ago?
MR. EARNEST:  Well, let’s talk about a couple of things.  The first is ISIS is essentially the inheritor of al Qaeda in Iraq.  And these extremists have been wreaking havoc in this region of the world for a long time, so they’ve certainly been on the radar screen of the national security professionals, national security leadership of this administration for five years.
Q    So Janet Napolitano was right that they’ve been on the radar screen --
MR. EARNEST:  They were also on the radar screen of the national security officials in the previous administration because there was concern about the threat that al Qaeda and Iraq posed to Americans in the region.
Now, this is an organization that has evolved, but that essentially is where they evolved from.  So this is something that the President has been focused on.  And the reason that the President is giving this speech now is that over the last couple of months we have seen this organization make substantial gains in Iraq and threaten Americans in Iraq.  And the reason for that is that the Iraqi government -- the core reason for this is that the Iraqi government was governing along sectarian lines in a way that ruptured what had been a united country. 
And so what we have been actively engaged in for quite some time at a diplomatic level is encouraging Iraq’s political leaders to unite that country behind a central government that demonstrates that they are committed to advancing the interests of every citizen of the nation of Iraq.  That’s a diverse country, and they need a central government that reflects that diversity and demonstrates a commitment to representing the interests of that diverse population.
April. 
Q    Josh, I want to ask you a couple of questions.  Back on your talking point today -- buy-in and also partnerships -- would you say that if you’re saying buy-in and partnerships you mean that executive -- well, the White House and Congress will either succeed or fail together, no matter what happens?
MR. EARNEST:  What we would like to see is we would like to see Congress be united and to be a partner with this administration as we confront this threat -- for all the differences that I do not want to be in a position of papering over.  There are differences between Democrats and Republicans, particularly the Republicans on Capitol Hill, and the Democrats in the administration are substantial, that we have a difference of opinion about a range of things. 
But when it comes to protecting the American people and putting in place a strategy that makes good use of our intelligence capability, our diplomatic authority, and our military might, that we should be able to unite across partisan lines in support of that policy and in support of that strategy.  And we seek that kind of cooperation, consultation and partnership with everybody in Congress.
Q    So even with uniting across party lines, no matter what happens, successes will be shared evenly and failures will be shared evenly?
MR. EARNEST:  Well, the President is undertaking this effort with the intention to succeed.  And the President is willing to share credit with those individuals in Congress who are going to partner with this administration to accomplish these goals.
Q    Also, in the ramp-up to 9/11, as we are looking to this next anniversary, there are concerns by many in the national security field that with the threats of ISIL that something could possibly happen here.  What is the mindset of this administration in the lead-up to 9/11?  And is there a possibility of increasing the threat level in this country?
MR. EARNEST:  Decisions about increasing the threat level are made by the Secretary of Homeland Security, so you should consult with them about whether or not they are planning to increase the threat level.  I’m not currently aware of any plans to increase the threat level.
The second thing that's important for people to understand is the intelligence community continues to assess that there is no active plotting underway by ISIL for an attack against the homeland of the United States of America.
The third thing I want to point out here is that we are concerned and remain concerned about the threat of violence that is posed by foreign fighters.  And again, they're ironically named foreign fighters because we’re principally talking about Americans with American passports who have traveled to Syria and taken up arms alongside ISIL.  And there is a threat that those individuals pose because they have an American passport.  They can freely travel back to the United States, and would therefore be in a position to potentially carry out acts of violence here in this country.  That is something that we’re concerned about and something that we’re monitoring very closely.
We’re working with the international community to try to monitor the travel of those individuals so that we can try to limit the threat that they pose.
Q    The concern of those several dozen Americans who have those passports back and forth to Syria, that doesn't make you think about increasing the threat level here at all?
MR. EARNEST:  Well, again, I’ll say a couple things about that.  The first is we’re constantly recalibrating our security posture here in this country to try to meet the threats that we perceive.  And some of the changes to that security architecture are perceptible and some of them aren’t.  But we are constantly making sure that we have in place a strategy for protecting American citizens and protecting the homeland.
I’ll do a couple more.  Michelle.
Q    Do you feel like you have a handle on who all these foreign fighters are?  We’ve heard a number between 100 and 200, and that always kind of comes through other channels.  So what can the White House say specifically about how closely you are now able to track the foreign fighters?
MR. EARNEST:  The effort to monitor these foreign fighters is something that is the responsibility of the intelligence community.  And it’s difficult from this vantage point for me to spend a lot of time talking in detail about the actions of the intelligence community. 
But what I can tell you is the United States and this administration are very aware of the threat that is posed by these individuals.  We have been engaged in an effort both at a diplomatic level, at a law enforcement level, but also at an intelligence level to mitigate this threat.  And that means working closely with our partners in the region, but also with our allies in Western Europe.
We talked a little bit earlier last week about how there are -- there’s an even larger number of so-called foreign fighters that have originated from Western Europe.  So the threat to these Western countries is, if you just look at the numbers, even larger than the threat that currently is facing the United States.
But we’re going to work in united fashion, in coordinated fashion and united with our allies to confront this threat.  And I would also say something that I have been meaning to say for some time but haven’t, which is that the President is actually going to convene a meeting of the United Nations Security Council to discuss this issue and to talk about what sort of role the U.N. and our Security Council partners can play in trying to mitigate this threat that faces not just the United States, but to our allies and interests around the globe.
Q    But is there a confidence that we generally know who all these people are at this point and where they are?
MR. EARNEST:  Well, there are significant resources that have been dedicated to this effort.  I don't think that I would be in a position to say a whole lot more about this, but other than to say we recognize the severity and the seriousness of this threat, and we have responded accordingly by putting in place the kinds of policies and procedures that we feel mitigate this threat.  But it remains something that we’re concerned about.
Q    And we’ve heard you say “strategy” and then that a “strategy is being formed,” and “integrated strategy,” but then, “if it expands” and what role will everybody play.  So it seems like right now the strategy is to lay the groundwork for making those decisions, right?  Because whenever we hear an explanation of what the strategy is, it’s a lot of coalition building and putting something together to make those decisions in the future.  Is that how you would define the strategy right now?
MR. EARNEST:  I would define the strategy in a couple of pretty clear ways.  The first priority, as the President has laid out, is supporting Iraq’s political leaders as they form an inclusive government.  That inclusive government will be required to unite the country to face down the threat that is posed by ISIL and to take the fight to ISIL in their country.
After all, we need to start from a place where the Iraqi government and the Iraqi people are responsible for the security of their own country.  The United States stands ready and will continue to support the Iraqi government and the Iraqi people as they try to secure their own country.  So that's the first thing.
The second thing is engaging regional governments.  And when I’m saying regional governments, I’m principally talking about these Sunni-led governments in the region.  These are individuals who for two reasons should be involved.  The first is they can play an important role in coordinating with the Sunni tribes in western Iraq that can also take the fight to ISIL.  The second is that they have a larger stake in this even than the United States does; that so many of these countries actually are threatened by Sunni extremists that are wreaking havoc in some cases on their border or very near it.  So they have an interest in committing to this broader effort to degrade and ultimately destroy ISIL.
The third aspect of this strategy is engaging the international community, that there are resources that can be brought to bear by our NATO Allies and by other allies.  So we’ve already seen the U.K. and Australia and others commit military resources to providing some humanitarian relief to the religious and ethnic minorities that are being persecuted in Iraq.  So there’s a tangible role for our allies to play.
And, yes, there is a role to play for the United States military.  But it’s important for people to understand that that strategy for our military does not include sending combat troops on the ground into Iraq or to Syria.  But it does mean using the military might of the United States to coordinate with our allies in support of Iraqi and Peshmerga fighters that can take the fight to ISIL.  So that is the strategy.
And ultimately what -- let me finish with this just one last thing.  The thing that's important for people to understand is this is a different strategy than what was previously tried in Iraq, that previously the United States bore the overwhelming brunt of this commitment.  And ultimately, what we learned is that the United States military -- for all its prowess, and for all of the bravery that was exhibited over the course of years by our servicemen and women -- cannot solve this problem for the Iraqi people.  Ultimately it’s going to be up to the Iraqi people and the Iraqi government and Iraq security forces to secure their own country. 
And the failure to learn that lesson would be a profound mistake.  And it’s easy to -- and I think it’s understandable that people pay more attention to what the military component of our strategy is than they do to the diplomatic element of our strategy.  But it is critically important that we ensure that the international community and that regional governments are invested in this effort so that the United States of America and our military are not bearing this weight alone.
Do you have more, Michelle?
Q    Last one.  Okay, so all of this is groundwork-laying, basically.  And it’s hard to imagine what the President is going to do on Wednesday besides lay all this out again.  We’ve heard it before.  So what are you expecting concretely then by the U.N. Security Council meeting from the coalition that's been formed?  Do you have a timeframe for some kind of progress on that?  Because for weeks now, it’s been about building these coalitions.  So what’s the next kind of benchmark for seeing something from that coalition?
MR. EARNEST:  Well, the President spent a lot of time when he was at the NATO Summit talking to our allies in NATO about this issue.  The President also met with the Prime Minister and the incoming President of Turkey to discuss this issue, among other things.  He also talked to the King of Jordan about this issue.  The Secretary of Defense and the Secretary of State were there to participate in these conversations. 
As we speak, the Secretary of Defense is in Turkey talking about some of these issues with his counterparts there.  Over the course of this week, the Secretary of State will be traveling to the region where he’ll be meeting with his counterparts to talk about some of these issues.  The President’s counterterrorism advisor here at the White House, Lisa Monaco, is traveling to the region.  She was in Yemen and has trips to Saudi Arabia and at least one other country planned while she’s in the region this week.  So these conversations are ongoing, and they will continue.
You heard from the President himself on Friday indicate that he was encouraged by the reaction that he got from our partners and allies in the context of those conversations about their willingness to support a broader international effort to confront ISIL and degrade and ultimately destroy them.
Sam, I’ll give you the last one.
Q    Well, two questions then.  Can you talk a bit more about the tangible things you’ve gotten from our international allies?  I know that they support in broad the strategy that we’re doing, but have they committed any specific resources?
MR. EARNEST:  They have.  And there’s a long factsheet here that I won’t read from because we’ve all been here a while, but, yes, there are.  I’ll just -- I’ll do the first three, and they're in alphabetical order.  So Albania is first; they provided military equipment to the Kurds.  Australia participated in Mount Sinjar and Amerli airdrop operations.  They’ve pledged $4.6 million to the U.N. to address some of this situation, and they agreed to accept 4,400 refugees from Iraq and Syria.  They’ve also contributed significant airlift capacity and several planeloads of humanitarian assistance.
Q    Would you mind making that list public?
MR. EARNEST:  Yes, we’ll get that to you.  But it’s lengthy, and it’s an indication that nations like Canada, Estonia, Denmark, Finland, Germany, Hungary -- again, it’s alphabetical order, so it’s a long list.
Q    I know we’re running -- not much time.  Bill Nelson --you say you want congressional input here -- Bill Nelson, a senator, is actually introducing a bill that would authorize airstrikes in Syria.  Is that something that the White House would/could support?
MR. EARNEST:  I haven’t seen his legislative proposal, but I am confident that somebody here in the administration will be in touch with him about his proposal.  And we’re certainly interested, like I said, in getting some buy-in from Congress and are open to considering the kinds of things that they want to move forward to demonstrate the kind of partnership that we’d like to see between the administration and Congress.
Q    Last housekeeping item.  Has the President actually seen or heard the Ray Rice video?
MR. EARNEST:  I don't know.  I have not talked to him about it.  He’s an avid sports fan, and this is something that has been covered extensively in sports journalism, so I do know that the President is aware of the situation as it relates to the Ravens’ running back.  I don't know if he’s seen the video that was just released in the last 12 hours or so.
Q    What about the Hawks email?
MR. EARNEST:  Again, he’s a big NBA fan.  I’m confident that he’s aware of the story, but I don't know if he’s seen the email.
So thanks, everybody.  We’ll come back tomorrow.
END

	2:59 P.M. EDT
The White House
Office of the Press Secretary
James S. Brady Press Briefing Room
1:15 P.M. EDT
MR. EARNEST:  Good afternoon, everybody.  It’s nice to see you on this cheery Tuesday afternoon.  We all settled?  All right, Nedra, would you like to get us started, please?
Q    Yes.  Can you tell us why the President is giving a primetime speech tomorrow?  That certainly raises the stakes of what we should interpret -- the scope of the speech that it’s in primetime.
MR. EARNEST:  Well, Nedra, the President is looking forward to giving an address to the nation at 9:00 p.m. Eastern Time tomorrow.  In the interview that he did with “Meet the Press” on Sunday -- it was taped on Saturday -- the President talked a little bit about the progress that we have made thus far in terms of our taking the fight to ISIL and protecting the lives of Americans in the region.
The President noted that the formation of an inclusive government in Iraq would be a key turning point in this effort.  As we saw from the news last night, the Iraqi Prime Minister was sworn in, and he takes office alongside a cabinet and other senior members of the government that reflect the true diversity of the nation of Iraq.  The President believes that’s important because Iraq’s political leaders need to unite that country, to confront the threat that they face from ISIL in their country, and to take the fight to ISIL in their country.
The President indicated in the course of the interview that he taped on Saturday that after the formation of this inclusive Iraqi government, and based on the progress that we have made so far in terms of building an international coalition, taking some steps to order military strikes that have beat back ISIL, that we would enter the next phase.  And what the President will talk about in the speech tomorrow is what that next phase entails.
Generally speaking, at the core of that next phase is understanding and protecting the core national security interests of the United States and protecting the American people.  So there are a couple of different ways in which the President will talk about this in ways that are important. 
The President will talk about our continuing efforts to support the Iraqis.  Now that they formed an inclusive government and united the country, there’s an important role for the United States and the United States military to play in supporting the Iraqis as they take the fight to ISIL in their country.  The U.S. will continue to work, using our diplomatic influence around the globe, to build international support for the efforts that are underway by the Iraqis. 
That strategy will also include supporting the Syrian opposition as they take the fight to ISIL in their country.  The President several months ago gave the commencement address at West Point where he talked about his proposal for ramping up the kind of assistance that the United States currently provides to members of the moderate Syrian opposition.  So the President has talked about that.
Our efforts will continue as we build and strengthen the international coalition to confront that threat that’s posed by ISIL.  That means engaging regional governments in this effort.  There are senior members of the administration that are traveling to the region this week.  That also means continuing to engage members of the international community, including our allies in NATO in this effort.  And ultimately, all of this is directed toward, as I mentioned, our core national security interests that include degrading and ultimately destroying ISIL.
So this is part of what you’ll hear from the President tomorrow.  And the President is certainly looking forward to the opportunity to deliver that address.
Q    But it’s rare for him to speak in primetime --
MR. EARNEST:  It is.
Q    -- so I’m wondering why he chose to do it that way.  What does that mean?
MR. EARNEST:  It means that the President believes that this is a high national security priority.  And when you have priorities like this that emerge, the President believes it’s important for the American people to understand what progress we have made so far.  And the progress that we’ve made so far is important and substantial.  The President also believes it’s important to communicate with the American public about a key turning point, and the formation of an inclusive Iraqi government is a key turning point. 
And the President wants to make sure that he’s clear with the American public, with all of you who cover this administration so closely, and with members of Congress about what our strategy is going to be moving forward.  The President believes that congressional consultation is really important.  That’s why he’s meeting with the four congressional leaders of Congress -- bipartisan, bicameral leaders of Congress here at the White House later on this afternoon.
So this is an important opportunity for the President to communicate a very important message about our priorities and our national security to the American public.  And the President is looking forward to the opportunity.
Q    Does he plan to lay out any specifics of his plan to the lawmakers this afternoon?  Does he have an ask that he wants them to take back to their caucuses?
MR. EARNEST:  The President believes strongly in robust congressional consultation, and so I am confident that the President and the congressional leaders will have the kind of meeting that reflects the seriousness of the situation.  But because that meeting hasn’t started, I don’t want to get ahead of any message the President may communicate in the context of that meeting.  We are going to work at the conclusion of that meeting to try to provide you a readout to give you at least some sense of the issues and priorities that were discussed in that meeting.
Q    Congressman McKeon said he doesn’t really think there’s time to have a robust vote on the Hill since they only have a few more days that they’re meeting before the election.  Does the President think there’s time for Congress to weigh in effectively?
MR. EARNEST:  Well, I did not see those comments from Congressman McKeon.  What I’ll say just as a general matter -- it’s hard to respond directly to his comments.  So just as a general matter, let me say that the President does believe in robust congressional consultation.  That’s why the President is convening the meeting with the congressional leaders at the White House today. 
I would note that over the August recess -- the last five or six weeks that Congress has been out of town -- that has not prevented the President and others members of his staff from consulting regularly with members of Congress about this dynamic situation.  In the last week alone, the President, the Vice President, members of his national security staff and Cabinet have consulted with dozens of members of Congress from both parties about the situation in Iraq and Syria as it relates to ISIL.
Senate and House staff have received classified briefings this week, and all members of the House and Senate will receive briefings from the administration on Thursday, in just a couple of days.  I also know that the Armed Services and Foreign Affairs Committees in the House and Senate are convening hearings next week.  And I understand that Secretaries Hagel and Kerry will be testifying before those committees next week.
So that is an indication and just gives you a little snapshot of this administration’s commitment to robust consultation with Congress.  The President believes that’s important because he understands that Congress has and should have a role as these important decisions are being made.  And the President would certainly welcome support from members of Congress, however they choose to show it, for the steps that we’re taking to confront ISIL and mitigate the threat that they pose to American national security interests and the homeland.
This is a priority, because the President believes that when you have the executive branch and the legislative branch, Democrats and Republicans, bridging divides to present a united front both to our enemies but also to the international community, it only strengthens the hand of our country as we confront those threats.  It makes it easier to build strong international coalitions.  It certainly makes it easier to unite our country as we take the steps that are necessary to confront those threats. 
So congressional buy-in, as the President described it, is very important; it’s a priority.  And the President would certainly welcome the opportunity to have it. 
Roberta.
Q    What’s the status of the $500 million that the administration invested for aiding the moderate Syrian opposition?  Is the administration still seeking that $500 million?  Has the amount changed, or is that in flux?
MR. EARNEST:  Well, I believe you’re referring to the proposal that the President announced at the West Point speech that I mentioned earlier.  The President does believe that there would be value to the United States, in conjunction with the international community, working to ramp up the assistance that we provide to members of the moderate Syrian opposition.  This would have the effect of taking the fight to ISIL in Syria.  Because of the leadership, or lack thereof, of the Assad regime, and because of the atrocities that they have perpetrated there against the Syrian people, ISIL is essentially operating in a virtual safe haven in Syria.  That’s a dangerous situation.  And providing additional assistance, ramping up our assistance to members of the -- or elements of the moderate Syrian opposition would have the effect both of taking the fight to ISIL, but also taking the fight to the Assad regime.
Now, this is something that the United States has been clear about what our role is and what our role is not.  This does not -- the President does not envision a scenario where we would send American combat troops to be on the ground in Syria.  The President also does not envision a scenario where the United States is acting alone to support these elements of the moderate Syrian opposition.  There is a very important role for other regional governments to play, and we’ve been encouraged by the reaction that we’ve gotten from the -- over the course of the last couple of weeks in the context of the conversations that we’ve had with regional governments in terms of their interest in supporting our efforts and in supporting the moderate Syrian opposition.  
Q    Okay, so what’s the status of that request for the money?
MR. EARNEST:  The President continues to believe that it is important for the United States to ramp up our assistance to the moderate Syrian opposition, and it certainly is one important way that we could ramp up our assistance to them. 
Q    I mean, you still want Congress to give that particular sum?
MR. EARNEST:  Yes, of course.
Q    I wanted to ask briefly about Ex-Im.  There’s news this morning that a temporary extension may be happening.  And what’s the White House position on having a temporary extension for Ex-Im Bank?  Would that help?
 
MR. EARNEST:  Well, I’ve read news reports of these proposals; I haven’t looked at the specific proposals themselves, so I can’t comment on any specific proposal.  But I have -- I was heartened by the fact that some of these news reports indicated that Republicans were supporting an extension of the Ex-Im authorization.  That’s important because we have talked at some length about the important role that the Ex-Im Bank can play in supporting our economy and supporting jobs here in the United States of America. 
This not a controversial position; this is a position that’s espoused by the Chamber of Commerce, an organization that has not consistently, you might say, supported the administration’s economic priorities.  But in this case, the Chamber of Commerce and the administration agree that reauthorizing the Export-Import Bank has significant value.  President Reagan, when he was in office, on at least one or two occasions signed legislation extending the life of the Ex-Im Bank. 
So this is certainly consistent with previous positions taken by previous Republicans and even leading Republicans, so we certainly would welcome Republican support for extending the life of the Ex-Im Bank.
Q    Even if it’s temporary?
MR. EARNEST:  But at this point, I don’t have a specific reaction to some of the proposals that have been floated because I haven’t seen them other than in news reports.
Okay, let’s move around just a little bit here.  Alexis.
Q    Josh, the President in the past has talked to the American people about reaping the savings from ending the Iraq war.  Can you say how he will present to the American people what it could cost, how long it will last, how it will be paid for in terms of the strategy and the initiatives he’s going to describe?
MR. EARNEST:  Well, Alexis, in the context of the speech that the President is preparing for tomorrow, I wouldn’t expect something that’s quite that detailed.  But the President is very interested in communicating clearly with the American public about what our priorities are and what our plans include, and what our plans don’t include. 
And it’s important to note that the President, as much as anyone else, has certainly learned the lessons that are evident from previous military activities in Iraq -- specifically those are that the United States cannot -- again, it at least does not serve our interest to put the United States in a position in which we are bearing the load of the responsibility for providing security in the nation of Iraq.
What we need to do, and what the President believes that we need to do, and the strategy that the President has laid out, envisions supporting Iraq’s government and Iraq’s security forces as they take the fight to ISIL in their own country.  And there is an important and meaningful role that the United States military can play, but the President is not contemplating putting combat boots -- American combat boots back on the ground in Iraq.
That is what starkly differentiates the President’s strategy from the previous conflict that was fought there.  And that has consequences on a variety of measures; most importantly, it has consequences for our national security, but it also has consequences for the kind of -- the scale of the budget commitment that’s required.
Q    Well, if the President is not going to use this speech to describe a price tag to the American people, what is he going to be talking to members of Congress and the appropriators about in terms of their role in approving money?  He’s talked about the need for additional resources, so how detailed are they going to get?
MR. EARNEST:  Well, I would anticipate that they will have intensive consultations.  The President believes in the value of those kinds of conversations taking place between members of his national security team and the relevant committee leaders or political leaders on Capitol Hill.  But again, I’m not in a position to read out those detailed discussions that are taking place at this point. 
Move around a little bit.  Richard. 
Q    Thank you, Josh.  Two questions.  The first one -- will the President tomorrow describe -- even if you have tried earlier in this briefing -- the direct threat of ISIL on the American people and the allies by extension?  Yesterday, you used during the briefing expressions like, some analysts believe that there are dozens of individuals; some reports believe that there’s a risk these individuals can come over.  The previous administration was criticized for being vague in its argumentation.  Will the President be more precise in order to avoid being accused of being too vague?
MR. EARNEST:  Let me say a couple things about that, Richard.  The first is -- the thing that I can state as unequivocally as possible is that it is the assessment of the intelligence community -- and this is something that’s been repeated by senior members of the intelligence community and senior members our military leadership as well -- that there is no evidence to indicate that ISIL right now is actively plotting to hit the homeland.  It is important for people to understand that.
At the same time, the United States remains concerned about the threat that could be posed by individuals with Western passports, even some American citizens who have traveled to the region and taken up arms alongside ISIL.  These are individuals who, if they have chosen to do this, have obtained military training and are battle-hardened.  They’ve also demonstrated a willingness to risk their life for their cause.  That means that these individuals do pose a threat back here in the United States.  And the President -- at the direction of the President, the United States has mobilized elements of our intelligence community, elements of our law enforcement community, and even elements of our national security community to try to mitigate the threat that is posed by these individuals.  And we’re working intensively with our partners around the globe; this includes multinational organizations like INTERPOL, who have a role to play here.
And this is part of something -- of an effort that is ongoing 24 hours a day, seven days a week to make sure that this is a threat that we’re trying to mitigate.
Q    Josh, do these individuals deserve such a military deployment, as is going to be announced?  They can come over, take a machine gun, prepare the stuff, but do they deserve -- especially if there are dozens of them -- that the U.S. and the allies and NATO put so many energy and equipment and money on such an operation?
MR. EARNEST:  Well, the foreign fighter threat is a threat that we are concerned about and something that we have expressed on many occasions.  It’s not the only threat that is posed by ISIL. 
The other concern that we have is that they are clearly destabilizing an already volatile region of the world, and that is why it is in the interest of regional governments in particular to exercise some influence both politically and diplomatically, and in some cases even militarily to try to confront this threat, to degrade and ultimately destroy ISIL.
The other concern that we have is right now ISIL is operating in a virtual safe haven in Syria.  And this is another important lesson that our nation has learned in the last 15 years or so, that it is very dangerous for terrorist organizations, extremist organizations, to be able to occupy and operate in a safe haven, or a virtual safe haven like we see in Syria.  The reason for that is right now, as I mentioned earlier, the United States is not aware of any active plotting that's underway to attack the homeland.  But if ISIL were to establish a safe haven in Syria, there certainly is a risk that their attention could turn toward the West.  And that would, indeed, be a very dangerous situation. 
So there are a variety of risks that we’re trying to counter and mitigate as a part of this broader strategy that, again, involves the United States military, but does not rely solely on the United States military.  The components of the strategy that involve our intelligence agencies and involve our diplomatic agencies and our diplomatic influence is a critical part of making progress on the strategy that that the President has laid out.
Q    Very last question, Josh.  What does the President say to the allies to convince them to sign on?  How long will they be solicited?  Will the President -- does the President -- their help will be needed?  And what form, classic question, will victory take?
MR. EARNEST:  Well, let me start by -- in terms of building the coalition, we’ve been gratified to see that this has not required a lot of arm-twisting; that there is -- the President alluded to this in the interview that he did over the weekend, he alluded to the fact that regional governments, the Sunni-led governments in the region recognize that these extremists pose to their government.  And we have seen their response be to readily be interested in cooperating with the growing international coalition to confront this threat. 
The President also -- and I think he mentioned this in the news conference that he conducted on Friday -- talked about how ready our NATO Allies were to contribute to this effort, that they recognize the threat that's posed by ISIL -- both by foreign fighters that have traveled to the region, some of whom traveled bearing passports from their countries. 
In other cases, we had NATO Allies concerned about the prospect of ISIL getting comfortable in a safe haven in Syria or along -- or even over the border between Syria and Iraq. 
So it is pretty clear to the international community what vested interests they have in this outcome, and we have been pleased the way that so many members of the international community have responded to the President’s leadership on this issue.
In terms of our ultimate success here, the President was pretty clear about our goal being to degrade and ultimately destroy ISIL. 
Michelle.
Q    Even within this country, among congressional leadership, too, even today you hear them say, we don't know what the plan is; the President needs to tell us what the plan is.  So if this consultation and robust consultation has been going on for some time, to such an extent, where is the big disconnect there?  And why do you think Congress still doesn't even know what the plan is?
MR. EARNEST:  Well, Michelle, I won’t speak to or try to assess the motivation of some critics of the President who may suggest that he doesn't have a strategy.  That will not deter this administration’s commitment to consulting with members of Congress and describing to them the strategy that the President is pursuing and has been pursuing for some time to confront this threat.
Failing that, I assume that each of these members of Congress has televisions.  And if they are unsatisfied with the consultation that they’ve gotten, I certainly would encourage them to contact members of this administration to reach out to them personally.  But if they’d prefer to gather their news through the television, which I’m sure many of you in the front row would prefer, then we would strongly encourage them to tune into the President’s address at 9:00 p.m. tomorrow night, 9:00 p.m. Eastern; 8:00 p.m. Central -- (laughter) -- to check it out.
Q    Okay.  And when you say that the President will lay out a plan, I mean, today we’re hearing calls from congressional leadership to deliver the military objectives and the ends by which they will be achieved.  Will the President do that either in the meeting today with them or in his speech tomorrow?
MR. EARNEST:  Well, those who are carefully listening to the President describe his strategy understand that our strategy is much broader than just the military strikes the President has already ordered.  I would point out that the military strikes that the President has already ordered in Iraq have yielded some significant success.  Those military strikes in support of Iraq security forces and -- Iraqi security forces and Kurdish security forces blunted the ISIL advance on Erbil.  Those American military strikes assisted Kurdish forces as they retook the Mosul Dam.  The use of American military force was instrumental to ending the siege of Sinjar Mountain and the siege of Amerli.  These were two locations where religious or ethnic minorities were under grave threat by ISIL forces.  And more recently, you’ve seen the American military take steps in support of some Sunni tribes in the Haditha Dam in western Iraq. 
So the elements of the President’s strategy related to the use of military force in Iraq has yielded some success.  But people who focus only on that success are missing the other critical elements of the strategy that are critical to our success.
Again, I mentioned this earlier, I’ll say it again:  Those who expect that military action alone will ensure our long-term, sustained success in Iraq have failed to learn the lessons of the last decade.  It is critically important for us to build a genuine international coalition.  It’s critical for the United States to lead the way in encouraging the Iraqi government to govern in an inclusive way to unite that country so that it’s Iraqis who are taking responsibility for securing their country and Iraqi security forces who are taking the fight to ISIL on the ground in their country. 
Those are core elements of the strategy.  And to focus only on the military elements of the strategy is to fail to learn the important lessons that our nation has learned over the last decade or so, and fail to understand what the President’s comprehensive strategy is.  That strategy is predicated on protecting American national security interests.  And the President does not believe that it is in the interest of the United States to send 100,000 or 150,000 American combat troops back on the ground into Iraq.
There may be some who disagree with that.  But that is not the strategy that the Commander-in-Chief -- that this Commander-in-Chief is going to pursue.
Q    Okay, and last question.  When you mentioned protecting American security interests, part of the strategy that has been laid out also includes humanitarian aid, supporting Iraqi forces.  Why hasn’t targeting ISIS leadership been part of that stated plan?
MR. EARNEST:  Well, I will allow members of our intelligence community and military community to talk about some of the tactics that they may be recommending to the Commander-in-Chief. 
I will say a couple things, however.  The first is one of the first things that the President ordered back in June, once ISIL had made this dramatic advance across western and northern Iraq, was a significant increase in what the military describes as ISR -- this is intelligence, surveillance, and reconnaissance.  And these were assets that were deployed to Iraq to give this administration, the Commander-in-Chief, our military greater insight into conditions on the ground -- to better assess the condition of ISIL forces; to get a sense of what their strategy was; to try to get behind enemy lines and get a better understanding of the conditions on the ground. 
And we have made very important progress over the last two or three months where significant resources have been dedicated to this effort, and that has been benefited some of the military actions that I’ve described before.  And I would anticipate that as our intelligence improves and crystallizes, that our military capabilities will expand accordingly.
Jon.
Q    On that question of targeting individual leaders, does the military currently have the authority, based on what the President has already authorized, to go after ISIL leadership in Iraq?
MR. EARNEST:  Jon, as it relates to those specific tactics, I’d refer you to the Department of Defense.  The President has been clear about what goals he is currently ready for our military to act in support of.  Those goals right now are related to the protection of American citizens who are in Iraq.  These are our military and diplomatic officials who are either at the embassy in Baghdad or at the consulate in Erbil.
We’ve also -- the President has also ordered the military to take action in support of efforts to avert humanitarian disasters, such as the siege at Sinjar Mountain and Amerli that we discussed earlier.
But as the President also referred to, again, in the interview that he conducted over the weekend, is that now that we have the formation of an inclusive Iraqi government, that we’re ready to enter the next more offensive phase in this strategy.  The President will talk a little bit more about that tomorrow.
Q    But just so I understand what you’re saying -- so you mentioned protecting U.S. personnel in Iraq, the specific humanitarian crises, and I guess one you didn't mention but it’s been mentioned in the past is infrastructure.   So is it a correct interpretation to say that specifically going out and targeting ISIL leadership in Iraq doesn't fall into one of those three categories?  Or does it?
MR. EARNEST:  Well, again, I don't want to get into the specific tactics that may or may not be considered by the Department of Defense as they’re providing advice to the Commander-in-Chief.  But the President has laid out what these broader goals are, and the other element that I didn't mention is supporting Iraqi and Kurdish security forces in some counterterrorism operations.  That's been something that the United States has been supportive of for quite some time in this region of the world.
But I don't want to get ahead of -- it’s not that I don't want to get ahead of anything, it’s that I’m not in a position to provide any more detailed guidance that the President has received from his military advisers beyond the goals the President has laid out for them.
Now, the thing I’ll point out is I’ll just point out that now that there has been the formation of this inclusive Iraqi government, it does open us up to the next phase in the strategy.  And the President will talk a little bit more about that tomorrow.
Q    And Tony Blinken said the other day that this effort to defeat and destroy ISIL may not be finished by the time the President leaves office.  I’m wondering if that includes airstrikes.  I mean, could we still be seeing the kind of sustained campaign of airstrikes in Iraq two and a half years from now when the President is leaving office?
MR. EARNEST:  Well, I think those kinds of -- that’s an important question; it’s also difficult to predict exactly how these kinds of things play out. 
I think the President has been clear that this is not the kind of problem that we anticipate that we’re going to solve right away.  Part of that is because coalition building takes some time, and we’ve also seen this terrorist group demonstrate some pretty sophisticated military capability.  So this is a difficult challenge, but the President is confident that by uniting the international community and engaging regional governments, that having an effective local Iraqi government, that the world will prevail over this very terrible organization.
Q    But you don’t rule out the possibility that U.S. fighter jets could still be fighting combat missions over Iraq in January of 2017 when the President is leaving office?
MR. EARNEST:  I would hesitate to make predictions on just about anything --
Q    But you don’t rule it out.  I’m not asking you to predict what’s going to happen, but you don’t rule it out, I mean, given what you just said about how this is a long --
MR. EARNEST:  Well, the President has been clear that this is not a short-term proposition.  But in terms of whether this lasts a year, a year and a half, two, two and a half years, I would hesitate to make any predictions about that.
Q    Okay, just one last question.  The Sotloff family is saying that Sotloff was sold to ISIS by the so-called moderate Syrian opposition.  And I’m wondering if you -- and I assume this is the same moderate opposition that you’re now talking about ramping up U.S. military support for.  Do we have any information?  Is that correct?  Was he turned over by the very rebels that we are now talking about ramping up support for?
MR. EARNEST:  Well, let me start, Jon, by just saying that the thoughts and prayers of everybody here at the White House continue to be with the Sotloff family as they grieve for the loss of their son.  And everybody here is grieving alongside them. 
As it relates to the specifics of this matter, based on the information that has been provided to me, I don’t believe that is accurate.  But I do know, at the same time, that this is the subject of an ongoing FBI investigation.  So this is something that they’re looking into all aspects of this, including how Mr. Sotloff may have come into the hands of ISIL.  Ultimately, ISIL is responsible, and they have claimed responsibility for this despicable violent act that the world has seen and has been roundly condemned.  But for questions about that investigation, I’d refer you to the FBI.
Let’s move around just a little bit. 
Q    Josh --
MR. EARNEST:  I’ll come back to you.  Scott.
Q    Josh, on another subject -- Larry Summers is speaking over at Brookings this afternoon.  And they’ve got a report out on lifting the oil export ban (inaudible).  Is the administration giving another look to that?
MR. EARNEST:  Well, the first thing, Scott -- the only reason that we’re having a conversation like this is because the President’s all-of-the-above energy strategy is working.  We have succeeded in enhancing our energy security, in cutting carbon pollution, and in spurring economic growth.
Since the President took office, U.S. production of electricity from wind has more than tripled.  Production of electricity from solar is up more than tenfold.  And production of oil and gas has grown each year.  And today, the United States of America is the world’s leader in oil and gas production.  That is a pretty strong testament to the policy that this President has put in place to pursue an all-of-the-above approach to energy.
I mean, I’ll tell you that at this point there is no change to our crude oil export policy, but we have said many times that we’re pleased that domestic oil production is going up.  That’s a good thing; it’s certainly good for our economy.  And there are some communities across the country that have benefited from this tremendously. 
We’re always taking a careful look at these dynamic energy markets, and assessing the sort of economic, environmental and security opportunities and challenges that may exist.  But at this point, I don’t have any change in policy to announce.
Major.
Q    Josh, I asked you this yesterday.  I want to give you another chance -- ask it again.  Is the speech an opportunity for the President to tell the country that airstrikes in Syria have now been authorized?
MR. EARNEST:  If the President has an announcement to make about Syrian airstrikes -- or airstrikes by the U.S. military in Syria, he’ll announce that.  I won’t announce that from here.
Q    Okay.  To follow up on Jon’s last question -- if there is an ongoing investigation into whether or not moderate Syrian rebels handed over an American journalist who was then beheaded by ISIL, why would the President even consider adding more arms or support for the moderate forces that may have turned over an American who was beheaded by the enemy he’s now trying to confront and defeat?
MR. EARNEST:  Well, let me say two things about that.  The first is, as I mentioned to Jon, that information does not match the information that I’m currently aware of.  There is a broad FBI investigation into Mr. Sotloff’s disappearance and his death, because the President is determined to ensure that those who are responsible for his disappearance and death are brought to justice.
All of that said -- and that is why part of the investigation is related to how Mr. Sotloff came into the hands of ISIL -- that said, you are underscoring something that is really important for people to understand.  And this has been a difficult challenge for not just the United States, but for other countries to confront, and that is vetting the individuals who are part -- who are elements of the Syrian opposition to ensure that the support that we’re providing is going into the hands of the right people; that there are extremists who are operating in Syria, like ISIL, and the last thing that we want to do would be providing support, even inadvertently, to individuals who have the kind of extremist ideology that we’ve seen from ISIL.
So the United States has been engaged in a very careful effort to vet individuals who receive assistance from the United States, or even receive assistance from other countries.  And that is difficult work.  But over the course of the last several years, we’ve made a lot of progress in building the kinds of relationships and better understanding who are the individuals that make up the elements of the Syrian opposition, and give us a better sense of those individuals who the United States is willing to support because they are actually fighting to install a government in Syria that actually reflects the will of the Syrian people.  That is, after all, the root of the situation that we’re trying to get to here.
Q    And the crux of my question is, why not freeze the whole question of additional aid until this particular matter is resolved to the full satisfaction of the FBI and the President of the United States?
MR. EARNEST:  Well, the support for the moderate Syrian opposition is a core component of the strategy here.  And the reason for that is simply that it is very dangerous for ISIL to be operating in a virtual safe haven anywhere in the world.  It’s particularly dangerous for them to be operating in a safe haven in a region of the world as volatile as Syria and Iraq. 
Second, the President does not believe it is in the national security interest of the United States of America for us to send American combat troops on the ground into Syria.  I think the President described that as a profound mistake.
So as I was discussing this question with somebody yesterday -- it may have been even with you -- that the reason that we are supporting Syrian opposition fighters to take the fight to ISIL in Syria is simply that it’s their country.  And so we need --
Q    Right.  But one of the points of the speech tomorrow night is to sustain and build public support for this strategy.  And one element of the strategy may be to provide materiel and financial support to people who might have been implicated or involved in handing over an American journalist who was then beheaded by the enemy we’re trying to defeat.  How do those things line up?
MR. EARNEST:  This is precisely why it’s so important that we are careful and that we thoroughly vet individuals and specific elements of the moderate Syrian opposition to make sure that we are not providing assistance to those individuals that don’t have the kinds -- that aren’t fighting for the kinds of things that we believe in.
Q    And the dinner last night, was it an opportunity for the President to tell the assembled group, foreign policy experts, what he was going to do, or have them advise him on what to do?
MR. EARNEST:  Well, any sort of gathering like that will be most effective when there is an exchange of ideas.  And so the President used the opportunity of this dinner to meet with national security and foreign policy experts, including many who previously served in the government under Presidents of both parties.  And the goal was to describe to them the President’s observations coming out of his foreign trip. 
The President spent a lot of time talking with our NATO Allies while we were in Wales and also convening some other meetings on the sidelines on a whole range of issues -- everything from the situation in Ukraine to the situation as it relates to ISIL.  So the President was able to give them some insight into his thinking and to share his observations based on the many conversations that he’d had with our allies and partners over the last several days. 
It also was an opportunity for him -- for the President to hear from some of these experts about their perspective on the situation, and all of this taking place in advance of some of the conversations that the President is having with senior members of Congress, and certainly in advance of the national address that the President will deliver on Wednesday night, it was very valuable.
Q    So this was part of a process to continue to form the strategy the President will present to the nation?  So it wasn’t fully formed as of last night?  He’s still adding to it as he draws near to the speech?  Is that a fair interpretation?
MR. EARNEST:  Yes.  I also think it’s fair for you to assume that even after the President speaks on Wednesday night that he and his team will continue to work and refine the strategy. 
What we’re seeing is a very dynamic environment on the ground.  Two weeks ago -- maybe even fewer -- less than that, nobody would have predicted that the Iraqis would be able to come together and form this inclusive government a couple of days before their constitutional deadline.  So what we’re seeing are some fast-moving developments in the region, and I would anticipate that as the President develops a strategy, it will be one that’s continually refined.
Q    This may sound to you like a flip question; I don’t mean it to be at all.  But if I listened to you correctly today, you said the President will tell the country there will be no ground troops involved, there will be no tactical operational details, no timeline for victory, no cost associated with the pursuit of victory.  Why should anyone watch?
MR. EARNEST:  Well, they should watch because the President of the United States and the Commander-in-Chief will be communicating directly with the American people about a core national security priority.  And in the context of those remarks, the President will lay out what he clearly sees as American interests in this situation.  He’ll talk about the risks that the United States faces.  And he’ll talk about the strategy that he has put together to confront those risks, to mitigate them, and ultimately to degrade and destroy ISIL.
Q    But you know the audience wants to know how we’re going to win -- Mr. President, tell us how we’re going to win.  And I don’t hear, based on what you said, that President is going to tell people that tomorrow night.
MR. EARNEST:  It’s because I don’t have the speech in front of me.  But I would encourage you to tune in on Wednesday night and hear directly from the Commander-in-Chief about his assessment of this critical national security priority.
Carol.
Q    To follow on that, how is the President going to get -- go before a country that’s as war-fatigued as this country is and not give any sense of timeframe?  What is he asking for?  Is he going to say, this is going to be months or years?  And if not, then why not?  He ran for this office on basically ending a decade-long of war, and now he’s asking the public to come along with him on a venture into that -- even from when he started it has gotten much more deeply involved than when he initially said.  And so how does he get up there and not give any sense of a timeframe?
MR. EARNEST:  Carol, the President ran for this office because he believed that he was the best person to protect the core national security interests of the United States of America.  And this President took office with the belief that removing, drawing down our 150,000 troops in Iraq was in the core national security interest of the United States of America.  This President took office promising to actually add and increase our presence in Afghanistan because he believed that should be part of the strategy, and that that was part of the core national security interest of the United States of America.
What the President is doing now is he’s making decisions about the core national security interests of the United States.  And he has done that in a way that reflects the kind of comprehensive, thoughtful strategy that the American people would expect from their Commander-in-Chief.  It includes elements of our intelligence, as I described earlier, in terms of increasing our knowledge of the situation on the ground.  It includes diplomatic engagement using the influence of the United States of America to enlist our allies around the world and regional governments in this fight.  And, yes, it includes the deployment of military force that has already enjoyed some important success in Iraq.
So the President has laid out a core strategy that does reflect our core national security interests.  When it comes to the timeline, I think the President has been honest about this for a month or more that this is not a short-term proposition.
Q    But what does that mean? 
MR. EARNEST:  Well, it means that I think the American people need to expect that this is something that will require a sustained commitment.  And that is why this administration is so deeply engaged with our partners around the world and in the region to demonstrate that we are determined to use America’s influence in the world -- whether that’s our diplomatic influence or our military might -- to unite the international community and to work alongside the Iraqis as they take the fight to ISIL in their country; that ultimately, there is a core national security interest that is affected by the expansion of ISIL.
That’s why we’re going to be engaged in a comprehensive strategy, working with the international community and the Iraqis, to degrade and destroy ISIL, simply because it’s in the core national security interest of the United States.  And I’m not going to stand up here and neither is the President tomorrow going to stand up here and make precise predictions about how long it’s going to take.  But I think the President --
Q    He sets timetables all the time.
MR. EARNEST:  I think the President has been pretty clear about the fact that this is not a short-term proposition. 
Q    When you say -- can I ask --
MR. EARNEST:  April.  Oh, I’m sorry.
Q    When you say that he’s going to outline a more offensive phase in this --
MR. EARNEST:  To be clear, that’s what he said in his interview with “Meet the Press” on Saturday.
Q    When he says something like that, like -- so should we expect that he’s going to detail that there’s going to be new types of airstrikes in Iraq?  Is it possible that he will announce a decision on Syria by tomorrow?  I mean, you were asked yesterday whether or not he had made that decision yet and you said no. 
MR. EARNEST:  I did.  And the reason is simply that when the President has made that decision, he will be the one to announce it.  It won’t be me.
What the President was trying to illustrate and what I’m trying to illustrate today is that we’ve been very clear about what our strategy for dealing with this situation has been over the last several months.  And the core principles at play here, again, were protecting the lives of Americans in the region, preventing humanitarian disasters.  We’ve seen ISIL prey upon vulnerable religious and ethnic minorities in the region.  The United States has used our military force to counter that in support of Iraq and Kurdish security forces who are taking the fight to them on the ground.
We have -- as we have been for some time -- invested in some elements of counterterrorism.  And we’ve done all of that, and limited the -- the President has ordered all of that and has limited those activities to those core priorities because, as he described earlier, he doesn't want to be the Commander-in-Chief of the Iraqi Air Force; that ultimately, it needs to be the Iraqi people and the Iraqi government and the Iraqi security forces that step up and take the fight to ISIL.
And there can be a role for the United States to play in terms of building international support to work and help with the Iraqi, whether that's doing more to ensure that the Iraqi security forces have the proper equipment.  In some cases, that may be providing additional training to Iraqi and Kurdish security forces.  In some cases, it may be enlisting regional Sunni-led governments to doing some diplomacy and politics with Sunni tribal leaders in western Iraq.  They obviously have some military capability.  And winning them over to the side of the international community to take the fight to ISIL could be a very valuable strategy. 
There also is a role for the American military to play in terms of supporting Iraqi and Kurdish security forces as they take the fight to ISIL.  And the next phase means that now that the Iraqi government has formed and it’s inclusive, and they have demonstrated a commitment to pursuing the kind of inclusive governing agenda that will unite the country, it’s easier for the United States to come behind them and support them as they take the fight to ISIL. 
But the important thing for people to remember is that we’re not going to do that alone.  The United States is only going to do that with the strong support and active involvement of the international community.  And that includes our NATO Allies; that means our allies around the world; that includes enlisting these regional governments, these Sunni-led regional governments that have arguably more at stake in the immediate-term at least than anybody else.
I’d even note that the National Security Advisor, Susan Rice, spent the last three days in China discussing a range of issues important to our bilateral relationship.  But part of the conversations that she was having with her Chinese counterparts and with Chinese leaders was about this international coalition to confront ISIL.  So this is a multi-faceted effort.  And it is a multi-faceted strategy that recognizes that the President feels a responsibility to lead an international coalition, to build an international coalition, and to do so in a way that ensures that we’re not relying solely on the might of the American military.
There is no doubt that the American military can play an important role in tipping the scales here.  But if we’re going to have an enduring solution to this problem, we’re going to need the Iraqis to step up and take responsibility for the security of their own country.
Stephen.
Q    Josh, you called on me.   You called on me.
MR. EARNEST:  Okay, April.  Go ahead.  I’ll come back to you Stephen.  (Laughter.)  Very chivalrous of you, Stephen.
Q    I’ll yield. 
MR. EARNEST:  I’d expect nothing less.  (Laughter.)  Go ahead, April.
Q    Josh, I want to go back on success versus winning.  Years ago, the press secretaries who were standing there during the Bush years steered us away from using the word “win,” saying that -- when they were talking about -- a while ago, the war in Iraq, saying that it was totally different than what we were used to.  And they were using words like “success”.  And fast-forwarding to today, you’re using the word “success” instead of “win”.  What is the definition of “success” when we deal with ISIL this time?
MR. EARNEST:  Well, I think the President has been very clear about what our goal is, and our goal is to degrade and ultimately destroy ISIL.
Q    Degrade and destroy.  So what does that mean?  Does that mean that you’re going to get the heads?  You’re going to deal with the people here?  You’re going to stop it here as well as over there?  What does that mean?
MR. EARNEST:  Well, April, what the intelligence community assesses right now is that ISIL is not currently actively plotting against the homeland for the United States -- of the United States.
Q    But they’re going there -- places like Minnesota.  I mean there are components, fringes that are going over there, fighting for ISIL and then trying to come back here.  Is it an approach over there as well as here?
MR. EARNEST:  Well, I think that the -- we certainly are concerned about the threat that is posed by these foreign fighters.  These are the individuals that you’re describing, some of whom have Western passports and are traveling to the region and taking up arms to fight alongside ISIL.  There is a strategy that is in place to mitigate the threat that is posed by those individuals. 
But ultimately, if we degrade and destroy ISIL in the region that we’re discussing here, then there’s no fight for these individuals to travel to.  So that's not the only element of our strategy for confronting the threat that's posed by foreign fighters.  But if we’re able to degrade and destroy ISIL in the region between Iraq and Syria, then that certainly would be an important part of mitigating the threat that's posed by foreign fighters.
Q    I don't mean to belabor the point, but the way we understand that this is they're finding out about ISIL through websites and going over there, ISIL is different from al Qaeda where they are training them over there and say, go do what you want.  They don't have to, like with Osama bin Laden, say this is what we want to do, and he gives approval.  They're trained over there to go back and do the ISIL bidding here, wherever.  So it’s a different component.
MR. EARNEST:  Well, that's not -- there’s an evolving assessment here.  But I think it’s important for you to understand what our concern is.  Our concern right now, April, is that you have individuals with Western passports who are traveling to this region, taking up arms alongside ISIL.  They're getting training.  They're being equipped.  In some cases, they're being even further radicalized.  They're also demonstrating a willingness to put their life on the line for their cause.  That makes them dangerous individuals. 
We don't yet know right now of any sort of broad plot that's being conceived of by ISIL to hit the homeland.  We are concerned, however, that individuals may return from the fight to carry out acts of violence in this country.  So we’re concerned about the threat these individuals pose.  Right now there’s no indication, according to the assessment of the intelligence community, that there is an active plot underway to strike the U.S. homeland.  So there’s a little bit of a difference in the assessment of the intelligence community and what you’re describing.
But we are taking steps to mitigate the potential threat that exists, and it’s one that we’re concerned about.
Q    And what’s the length of the speech tomorrow?
MR. EARNEST:  The speech is still being written.  I would not anticipate --
Q    What’s the length of the draft?  (Laughter.)
MR. EARNEST:  Well, it’s a draft because -- I described it as a draft, or you accurately described it as a draft because it’s likely to change between now and tomorrow night. 
Q    What’s the length?
MR. EARNEST:  We’ll get you some more guidance tomorrow as we get closer to a final version.
Stephen.
Q    This evolving strategy clearly depends significantly on the new Iraqi government being more inclusive and unified than the last one.  But what happens if it isn’t?  It’s pretty difficult to think of a precedent of a unifying and non-sectarian government working over a long period of time in that part of the world.
MR. EARNEST:  Well, I’ll say a couple things about that.  The first is it would have been hard even just a month or two ago to envision the peaceful transfer of power in Iraq.  But yet, that's exactly what occurred.  I think what gives the -- I think there are two things that give us some confidence.
The first is that we are hearing the leaders of Iraq say the right kinds of things; that we are hearing this diverse Iraqi government.  Ostensibly, that's part of the key here is that we have a Shia, who is the new Prime Minister, we have a Kurdish President and a Sunni Speaker.  That is an indication that there is a diverse government leadership in place to lead and unite a diverse country.
The second this is, we’re hearing those leaders say the right kinds of things -- that they are interested in uniting that country to confront the threat that’s posed by ISIL.  And this sort of relates to the second thing, which is, it has never been more clearly in the interests of Iraq’s political leaders to govern in a more inclusive way than it is right now. 
Iraq faces an existential threat from ISIL.  And if they fail to unite that country to meet that threat, it undermines and threatens the government and the nation as a whole.  So it is clearly in the interest of Iraq’s political leaders to govern in an inclusive way. 
So we’ll see, Stephen.  I think the truth is, we’ll see -- that that will be the test, is to not just listen to their words, but watch their actions.  But there is reason for some cautious optimism about this. 
Ed.
Q    Josh, speaking of the stakes tomorrow night, when you’ve got this ABC News-Washington Post poll today saying 55 percent believe the President is not a strong leader and 52 percent believe this has been a failed presidency, how does he make his case to the American people when a majority of the public doesn’t believe he’s been a strong leader?
MR. EARNEST:  The President will make his case based firmly on what he believes is in the best interest of the United States.  That’s the case that he has put together, and that is the case that he will make.
The President was elected because of the American people’s confidence in his ability to make these kinds of very important decisions.  And he was entrusted with a responsibility to protect the core national security interests of the United States, the President making decisions based on that judgment and based on his analysis of what those core national security interests are.  And that’s the strategy that the President will discuss in his speech tomorrow night.
Q    The last time he spoke to the American people in primetime -- a year ago tomorrow, actually, on Syria, when he said, look, I’ve gone to Congress, we’re going to pull back for now; there’s a diplomatic initiative on the chemical weapons and we’re going to pursue that instead of military action right now -- and he said, “The idea of any military action, no matter how limited, is not going to be popular…after all, I spent four and a half years working to end wars, not to start them.  Our troops are out of Iraq, our troops are coming home from Afghanistan.”
To Carol’s question a moment ago about him running for office, wanting to end wars, and you said something to the effect of he believes it was in the national security interest of the American people to get out of Iraq.  If he’s now here one year later making the case potentially for expanded military action in that region, does it not suggest that maybe he was too quick to get out?
MR. EARNEST:  It does not, Ed.  And the reason for that simply is that we cannot be in a position -- the President believes firmly that the United States should not be in a position of placing the burden on our American military to be solely responsible for providing security in Iraq.  We’ve tried that; it didn’t work. 
The American military, thanks to the bravery and service of so many of our men and women in uniform, made tremendous sacrifices and tremendous gains in Iraq to try to create and stabilize -- to create a stable security situation in Iraq.  But that was not sustainable because we saw a failure on the part of Iraq’s leaders to govern in an inclusive way that would unite the country to take advantage of that stable security situation to lead Iraq into prosperity.
So ultimately, the lesson that we need to take from that -- and certainly the lesson that the Commander-in-Chief takes from that situation -- is that we cannot rely solely on the American military to provide security for the Iraqi people.  Ultimately, what we need to do is we need Iraq’s political leaders and Iraq’s security forces to take responsibility for providing security in their own country.  That is the focal point of this strategy.  And it will involve the international community providing support to the Iraqi people and to Iraq’s government.  It involves the American military, because of their tremendous capability, and again, because of the bravery and service of our men and women in uniform. 
There are important things that we can do to support them in this effort, but ultimately it’s Iraq’s people, Iraq’s government, and Iraq’s security forces that need to be responsible for securing the nation of Iraq.
Q    On the military use -- he also said in his speech a year ago, “I will not put American boots on the ground in Syria” -- he was consistent on that; “I will not pursue an open-ended action like Iraq or Afghanistan.  I will not pursue a prolonged air campaign like Libya or Kosovo.”  He was talking about Syria.  Haven’t we now seen a prolonged air campaign in Iraq and now potentially expanding that into Syria?  So how does this not become -- how does he ensure that this does not become mission creep?  When he told the American people a year ago, I’m not for prolonged air campaigns -- it certainly looks that way.
MR. EARNEST:  Well, what the President is going to lay out, Ed, is the next phase in our strategy.  And I would encourage you and your viewers to tune in and listen to what the President will describe as the core priorities and the core strategy that he intends to pursue.  And the strategy will be predicated on the idea that we cannot rely solely on the American military to solve this problem; that we need to work with the international community to mobilize resources and assets and in some situations even capabilities to assist and support the American military in these efforts.
But ultimately, it has to be the responsibility of Iraq’s people and Iraq’s political leaders in Iraq.  And ultimately, it needs to be the moderate members of the Syrian opposition to take the fight to ISIL on the ground in their country.  And that is how we will solve this problem not just in the short term, but what the President is looking for are longer-term solutions.  And that if we want sustainable and enduring solutions, it’s going to require building up the kind of on-the-ground capability for individuals in countries to secure their own ground.  And that’s what will prevent safe havens from sprouting up that could ultimately, down the road, threaten the United States, our interests, and even, eventually, our homeland.
Chris.
Q    Thanks, Josh.  But again, to follow up, if the President is asking America as well as Congress to buy in, and we know the unease that the American people have felt about the open-ended nature of previous military engagements -- Secretary Hagel said that once you start any military action it doesn’t stop there; it ends up somewhere down the road -- can the President ask the American people to buy in without giving some specificity about what the end game is?
MR. EARNEST:  I think the President has been specific about what the end game is.  The President believes that we need to degrade and ultimately destroy ISIL.  That is the end game.
What the President will talk about tomorrow -- since he’s already talked about that pretty bluntly -- what the President will talk about tomorrow is what are the steps that we can take to get us there.  And those steps, as I mentioned, include the formation of an inclusive Iraqi government and supporting that Iraqi government as they take the fight to ISIL in their own country; supporting elements of the moderate Syrian opposition as they take the fight to ISIL in their country; building up the capability and buy-in of the international community so that they can lend resources and in some cases capabilities to this effort.  It means engaging regional governments in the effort; these are regional governments that have some diplomatic ties to, for example, Sunni tribal leaders in western Iraq.  These Sunni tribes can be engaged in the effort to take the fight to ISIL. 
And ultimately, this is also going to involve some elements of the American military.  They have tremendous capability, and there is an important role for the U.S. military to play.  But ultimately they cannot be solely responsible for solving this problem.  We’re going to need a lot more tools in the toolbox than just the American military if we want to have the kind of enduring solution that is in the best interest of American national security.
Q    When one of the tools that you’ve talked about and that the President has repeatedly talked about is this international coalition.  At the end of the NATO Summit, the suggestion was that this new core coalition was going to put together a plan -- obviously, Secretary Kerry is on his way to the region -- and that they hope to have some more specifics worked out in time for the U.N. General Assembly later this month.  So does that necessarily mean that the President is likely to wait until that time before taking any kind of expanded action?
MR. EARNEST:  Well, I’m not going to put any time constraints on presidential decision-making.  The President, when he has made some decisions, will announce them.
The thing that I want to make clear is that we have already secured some important commitments from our allies around the world to be engaged in this effort, and there is a list of more than two dozen countries that have made specific commitments to this effort.  And I don’t have that list in front of me, unfortunately, but we can provide that for you after the briefing.  That is an indication that we’re already starting to see important allies and partners of the United States step up and recognize that this needs to be an international effort.
Q    But step up beyond what the general categories already are, like humanitarian assistance?  Taking that next step to where do we go to destroy ISIS?
MR. EARNEST:  I would anticipate that as we implement this strategy and as we move forward, and as we move into the next phase of this strategy, that we will be asking more of our allies and partners around the world.  There is an important role for our allies and partners to play, and this is going to require a sustained effort.  And we are pleased, we’re heartened by the response that we have received from regional governments, Sunni-led governments in the region, as well as our international allies.
Lisa Monaco, the President’s Chief Counterterrorism Advisor here at the White House, just returned from a visit to Yemen, Saudi Arabia, and Jordan this week.  And I was speaking to her this morning after she took a long flight back from that region and she was talking about how encouraged she was in terms of talking to her counterparts and the leaders of those countries about how they recognized how important it is for them to be engaged in this effort.  They are pleased to have the leadership of President Obama and other members of the international community to confront this threat that they take very seriously.
It’s good that they take this very seriously because they have important capabilities that they can lend to this effort.  And we certainly look forward to continuing to work with them.  And, yes, I do anticipate that there will be additional asks coming of them to contribute to this broader international effort to ultimately destroy ISIL.
Q    Can you tell us what those asks might be?
MR. EARNEST:  I’m sorry?
Q    Can you tell us what any of those asks might be?
MR. EARNEST:  Well, that’s the subject of ongoing discussions.  Lisa just returned from the region, I’m confident that she’ll continue to be in touch with her counterparts in those countries.  Secretary Kerry is traveling to the region, as well, over the course of this week.  Secretary Hagel was just in Turkey yesterday, I believe.  So there have been intensive conversations that have been going on and will continue, but I don’t have any specific details to tell you about right now.
Roger.
Q    Back to the budget.  The President was real clear in the “Meet the Press” interview that it would take additional “resources,” was the word he used.  Whatever these resources are, do you need Congress to approve them before they go home later this month?
MR. EARNEST:  Well, I don’t have a specific deadline to set for Congress, but we would welcome Congress taking the kinds of steps that would indicate their clear support for the strategy that the President has put forward.
Q    In terms of money?
MR. EARNEST:  In terms of anything.  We certainly would -- the reason for that is simply that the President believes that our national security strategy is more impactful if we can demonstrate the clear support of both the executive branch and the legislative branch, Democrats and Republicans, presenting a united front to the international community and to our enemies as we take the fight to them and pursue our goal of degrading and ultimately destroying ISIL.
Q    CR?
MR. EARNEST:  What about it?
Q    Money on the CR?
Q    You want it in the CR then?
MR. EARNEST:  Well, I don’t have any announcements in terms of --
Q    No, no, but I mean, that’s a preference.  The next budget thing that’s coming for both you and the Congress.
MR. EARNEST:  Right, well, I’m confident that the President --
Q    That’s the most practical way to express support.
MR. EARNEST:  I’m confident that the President and the congressional leaders will be discussing the CR in their meeting this afternoon.
Q    One other unrelated question.  Home Depot -- they’ve had another credit fraud incident, sort of like Target.  Does the U.S. government, are they -- the FBI is investigating, I believe.  Have you found out anything about it?  Who is behind it or how many millions of people are affected?
MR. EARNEST:  Well, Roger, I can tell you that the United States Secret Service is leading the investigation.  It’s ongoing, and so for questions about the investigation I’d refer you to them.
More broadly, though, cyber threats pose one of the greatest national security dangers that the United States faces, ranging from vulnerabilities in our critical infrastructure to identity theft from credit card information.  Recognizing the importance of this issue, the administration has significantly enhanced the government’s capabilities and forged relationships with the private sector to prevent and mitigate cyber incidents while increasing efforts to prosecute cyber criminals.
In May of 2011, you’ll recall this announcement, the President sent up a detailed package of legislation to Capitol Hill on cybersecurity legislation, including specific data-breach legislation that would further protect the nation’s privacy and security.  Since that time, the administration has worked closely with Congress to try to shape important bipartisan cybersecurity legislation. 
But after considerable review and debate, Congress hasn’t acted as swiftly as we would like on some consensus provisions.  We would like them to take these important steps, even as they continue to work through the more complex legal policy challenges.  There are some consensus provisions that exist that have bipartisan support, but yet Congress has failed to act on them.  And so we want Congress to take the kinds of steps that would put in place measures that would protect the American people and that would better protect the privacy of the American people.  Because the cybersecurity threats we face are both immediate and evolving, we encourage Congress to move forward on cybersecurity legislation that protects our nation.
Justin, I’ll give you -- oh, Roger, did you have another one?
Q    Yes, I just wondered, do you have an idea of how many people are affected?
MR. EARNEST:  I don’t, but you might check with the Secret Service that’s investigating.  They may have an assessment of that.
So, Justin, I’ll give you the last one.
Q    I have two quick ones.  I’ll try to squeeze them in.  On Iraq, the first is -- you were kind of talking to Roger about how you guys are maybe agnostic on how Congress buys in, whether it’s a budget vote or an authorization or anything like that.  And I understand that part of the reason that you haven’t revealed that is that the President hasn’t had a chance to talk to leadership yet and hasn’t presented his plan to the country.  But what I’m wondering is if part of the speech that we’re going to hear tomorrow night is what the President specifically wants from Congress or what shape that buy-in will take.  Or is that something that we’re not -- you guys aren’t going to outline at any point?
MR. EARNEST:  Well, let me say this.  Stay tuned for the speech.  I don’t want to predict what’s going to end up in the speech because it’s still being written, but the focal point of the speech will not be our communications with Congress.  We can communicate directly with Congress about that.  The focal point of the President’s remarks tomorrow will be the broader strategy that he wants to put in place, using all elements of American power, to build an international coalition to degrade and ultimately destroy ISIL.
Q    And then you kind of talked about how you guys were encouraged that you didn’t need to arm-twist allies and regional partners, but Bloomberg reported last night that the President in New York would be offering a Security Council resolution that would essentially mandate that countries pass laws or do regulations to prevent foreign fighters from going to join ISIS.  So I’m wondering, first, if you can confirm that; but secondly, what him needing to go to the United Nations and codifying that in some way says about the buy-in that you’re getting from regional partners that you say are working along the --
MR. EARNEST:  That’s a good question.  What’s true is that the President will -- I haven’t seen the Bloomberg report so I can’t comment on it, but I can tell you that the President is planning to convene a U.N. Security Council meeting on this topic.  And the reason that he wants to do that is it’s important for us to set standards for the international community about what we want individual countries to do to mitigate this threat.  And that will be the subject of discussion at the meeting.
I think the fact that the President is convening the meeting and we expect robust participation at the meeting is an indication that there is strong agreement in the international community that this is a threat that’s worth confronting head on.
Q    Thursday, Josh?
MR. EARNEST:  I’m sorry?
Q    That will be Thursday?
MR. EARNEST:  I’m not sure which day that will be. 
Sam.
Q    Oh, thank you.  I appreciate it.
MR. EARNEST:  Yes, I’m just going to -- I’m going to regret this.  (Laughter.)
Q    No, you won’t, you won’t.  (Laughter.)  You noted throughout this briefing that ISIS does not pose an active threat to the United States, but we’ve seen --
MR. EARNEST:  Well, to be clear, just that they’re not actively plotting to hit the homeland.
Q    So I’m just wondering if you can square this with some of the polling numbers that we’ve seen -- 91 percent in this ABC poll see ISIS as a threat to U.S. interest; 7 in 10 in a CNN poll say ISIS has the resources to launch an attack against the United States.  Are these fears that we’re seeing in these public opinion polls, are they well-founded?  And how do you explain the numbers versus what the intelligence community has told you about the lack of an active plot?
MR. EARNEST:  Well, I’m hesitant to analyze a poll that I haven’t -- that I’ve only seen the reports of.  Frankly, even if I saw all the details of the poll I’d probably be hesitant to analyze it.  There are people who are better qualified to do that than I am.  But let me attempt to answer your question nonetheless.
We have seen ISIL perpetrate terrible acts of violence against American citizens.  I’m sure that is part of what is contributing to the information that you’re seeing in the poll.  The other thing that is undoubtedly true is that there are American interests in the region that are under a pretty direct threat from ISIL.  Without the intervention of the United States military to blunt the advance on Erbil, there was a grave risk of Americans who are working in our consulate in Erbil, that they could have been overrun by ISIL fighters.  That is certainly something that we’re concerned about.
It does threaten American national security interests for ISIL to be operating in a virtual safe haven along the vanishing border between Iraq and Syria.  So, again, without having a detailed understanding of the poll or even a detailed understanding of the numbers that you read off there, I think it’s understandable that the American people are evincing some concern about ISIL.
Q    Let me put it another way.  Should the public feel at this point in time vulnerable just being in America?  Should they feel like America is vulnerable to an attack by ISIL?
MR. EARNEST:  I think the American people should be confident that their Commander-in-Chief and that their government is expending significant time and resources to ensure that we’re using every tool at our disposable -- at our disposal to protect the American people.  And that includes using our diplomatic influence around the world to build an international coalition to confront this threat.  That means using our extensive intelligence resources to counter the threat that’s posed by foreign fighters but also to gather intelligence against ISIL in the region.  It also means using the tremendous military capability of the United States to further the effort to degrade and ultimately destroy ISIL. 
This will be part of an international coalition, but there’s no question that the United States military has capabilities that other countries don’t.  And we certainly will be asking other countries to step up and contribute to this effort, but the United States will continue to play our role as the indispensable nation of the world.  The President takes that responsibility seriously.  The President is clear-eyed about the threat that’s posed by ISIL.  And I think in the remarks that he delivers tomorrow night, you’ll hear a clear strategy from the President about what we’re going to do to keep the American people safe and to protect our security interests all around the globe.
Q    Josh, a quick follow-up, please?
MR. EARNEST:  Go ahead, JC.
Q    Thank you.  How concerned is this administration -- this is getting back to the domestic aspect -- that the Department of Homeland Security has lost track of 6,000 foreign nationals who came into this country on student visas and have basically disappeared?  And that’s in addition to another 58,000 foreign nationals who have expired their visa stay and cannot -- basically cannot be found.  Will the President be discussing this?
MR. EARNEST:  Jon-Christopher, what I would suggest is that you consult with the Department of Homeland Security that is responsible for immigration enforcement.  I haven’t seen the report that you’re referring to, but I would assume that it would fall into their purview.
Q    It’s been out in the media, obviously.  But the question is, we’re talking now about national security at home and other opportunities for this administration to secure its own population.
MR. EARNEST:  And I will tell you that the Secretary of Homeland Security and the Department of Homeland Security is committed to making sure that they are deploying the kind of tactics and strategy that is required to protect our homeland.  And that is something -- that is not a 9-to-5 job; that is a 24/7, 7-day-a-week kind of job.  And we have dedicated professionals who are on that task securing the American homeland right now.
Thanks, everybody.  Tune in tomorrow night.
END

	2:26 P.M. EDT
The White House
Office of the Press Secretary
Aboard Air Force One

	En Route California 
3:52 P.M. EST
MR. SCHULTZ:  Good afternoon, everyone.  Welcome aboard Air Force One.  Before we begin, I'm sure you all saw some significant news out of Philadelphia today.  In anticipation of your questions on that, I'm happy to give you the President’s reaction.  In fact, he is thrilled that the city of Philadelphia and the mayor today enacted a bill that would guarantee working families at least five paid sick days off per year. 
According to the bill, approximately 200,000 Philadelphia families who currently lack access to paid leave now stand to gain from today’s action.  As you know, about 27 days ago -- I did the math this morning -- the President called for an expansion of paid sick leave as part of his State of the Union address.  Congress hasn’t yet moved on this.  But we appreciate the city of Philadelphia doing just that.  We call on more cities and localities to do it.  We also reiterate our call for Congress to move as well.
And with that, I'm happy to take your questions.
Q    You said you were thrilled.  I thought you were talking about the DNC convention.  Did the President have any thrill reaction to that as well?
MR. SCHULTZ:  We saw that announcement as well, Margaret, and we're very pleased with that announcement as well.
Q    I have a question on Ukraine.  I was wondering if the cease-fire deal there in any way reduces the pressure on the President in terms of having him make a decision about sending more lethal weapons over to Ukraine.
MR. SCHULTZ:  Thank you, Darlene.  Our position on that hasn’t changed, which is that we are constantly evaluating our response to this crisis.  The President heretofore has been clear that the reason we haven't sent over the types of aid you're talking about is that principally we believe this should be resolved diplomatically.  And that is our preference; that is our priority.  And so we haven't made any determinations to change the sorts of equipment we're going to be sending.
Q    -- that discussion about sanctions, Eric, increasing sanctions on Russia? 
MR. SCHULTZ:  Well, I think I have no new announcements to make at this time.  We would only consider rolling back sanctions if Russia lives up to not only the agreement that was announced a few hours ago, but also the agreement that was agreed upon in Minsk a few months ago now.  Clearly, they have not lived up to that agreement in a variety of ways, so I don't have anything new on that until they do that.
Q    Is the President optimistic that this agreement will hold?
MR. SCHULTZ:  I think we welcome the news.  We're certainly gratified by the hard work of our European partners, including Chancellor Merkel and President Hollande.  We consider it a potential significant step in the right direction, provided that all parties abide by it.
Q    Are you concerned, is the President concerned that by putting another cease-fire in place now, after the pro-Russian forces have gained so much territory, that you are essentially enshrining the territorial gains that they have made? 
MR. SCHULTZ:  David, I think that we welcome the agreement that was announced a few hours ago.  We're still studying the details of what’s exactly in the agreement.  We believe that it is a potentially significant step in the right direction.  But our bottom line on this is that actions are going to matter a whole lot more than words.  And so we'll need Russia and all sides to live up to what they agreed upon.
Q    Is your bottom line, though, that you have to go back to where things were at the time of the Minsk agreement several months ago when obviously the pro-Russian forces had much less territory?
MR. SCHULTZ:  We absolutely believe that Russia should live up to the agreements from the previous Minsk agreement, from that time. 
Q    On a separate subject, do you have any further information or details on the Keystone bill that's has been voted on in Congress, and when the President might plan to veto it?
MR. SCHULTZ:  I don't have an update on that.  As you know, the approval process for this pipeline is one that predates this administration, and is hubbed at the State Department.  We're going to let that process unfold.  The President has announced that he would oppose and veto any legislative maneuvering to circumvent that process.  So he will indeed be vetoing it.  But again, I don't even think they’ve sent the bill over or even announced when the bill would come over.
Q    -- he could have this while he’s in Palm Springs, I think.  Is that not true?
Q    The Republicans have said they won't send it over until after their recess next week.  Yes, he’s going to veto it.  Do you have a sense of whether he would do that in some sort of public, “I'm vetoing this, I told you again and again I'm going to veto”?  Or would he do it behind closed doors, in private or something?
MR. SCHULTZ:  I don't have any rollout plans to announce for that step that, again, doesn’t seem like it's going to be today.
Q    -- on the West Coast.  Is he planning to wading in in any way to the court’s dispute?
MR. SCHULTZ:  As you know, our focus on this trip is on the first-ever cybersecurity summit, and consumer protection.  I would not anticipate the President wading in on that.  I do think that our view is this is a conflict that should be resolved at the negotiating table.  There’s a federal mediator right now mediating between both sides, and we want this resolved at the negotiating table and we want it resolved quickly.
Q    -- either side ask that the President get involved in some way?  Is that something under some circumstance he might consider if this is not resolved quickly?
MR. SCHULTZ:  Our view is this should be resolved at the negotiating table expeditiously. 
Q    I was wondering, when it comes to the cyber summit itself, a number of the CEOs -- Tim Cook, notwithstanding -- have decided not to attend personally, and to send other high-level people from their team instead.  And I'm just wondering, does the White House see this as a snub, or does the White House see this purely as a scheduling issue?  And do you think they’re trying to make a statement about the NSA and administration policies, or does it have nothing to do with that, and no hard feelings between everybody?
MR. SCHULTZ:  Margaret, I think we are very pleased at the participation across the board for the first annual -- well, not annual yet -- for the first-ever White House Summit on Cybersecurity and Consumer Protection.  I think if you look at who will be joining us over the next day or so, you’ll be looking at industry leaders in the tech industry, in the privacy advocacy community, in academia and government, and business leaders from across the board.  So we are gratified and we welcome their participation.
I know that some companies are sending different representatives, but we are pleased at their participation.
Q    Do you think that the decision of those who have decided not to come is to make a statement?  Or do you not see it as that, just sort of coincidence?
MR. SCHULTZ:  You’ll have to check with certain companies if they’re not participating.  But as I understand it, I think -- and I know we’re in the midst of sort of releasing the details, but not only the engagement that we've gotten from tech and business leaders across the board we're proud of, but also some of the commitments that are going to be announced over the next day or so are pretty significant.
Q    Can you talk more broadly through the weekend, besides this cyber summit?  We know he'll be attending a fundraiser and we know he'll be in Palm Springs.  But can you talk to us about will he see any of the players in the California potential Senate race in that Democratic field?  Or will he make an effort to not visit with any of them so that he doesn’t send a mixed signal?  How much politics will be on this trip?
MR. SCHULTZ:  As I suggested, Margaret, our focus and the President’s cause for this trip is the cybersecurity summit.  I would not anticipate a very robust public schedule beyond tomorrow, beyond Friday.  But we'll let you know if that changes.
Q    On the cyber end, the President gave a speech on NSA reform a year ago, and you turned out an update about a week ago. The essence of the update was that not very many of the reforms that he discussed have yet been implemented, including the movement of bulk collection of calls.  Is the President expected to address the slowness in implementing that plan during the course of the summit?
MR. SCHULTZ:  David, I'm not sure I buy the premise of your question.  This is something that, as you point out, was very important to the President.  He made a speech about it a little bit over a year ago, announced some pretty significant reforms.  The report that was issued I think a week ago now did describe and outline some pretty significant progress we've made on this.
But, as you point out, we're not done.  And I think that long past this issue fading from the headlines, this is work that a lot of our intelligence officials, the professionals across the interagency are working day in and day out on to make sure that we better strike the balance between civil liberties, privacy, and the security interests of the United States. 
Q    The biggest change the President announced in the speech was moving -- a year ago -- was moving the bulk collection to the private sector.  Nobody has seemed to be able to give an estimate of when that would happen. 
MR. SCHULTZ:  I don't have a status update on that for you. I would say that our focus for this trip, on this summit, is going to be more on cybersecurity and consumer protection, specifically bringing together industry, tech companies, consumer and privacy advocates, members of law enforcement, educators and students to really spur collaboration and adopt best practices. 
We're also, of course, going to reiterate our call on Congress to pass legislation, which we announced a while ago, which we have been frustrated with on their lack of progress.  This isn't and shouldn’t be a partisan issue.  Democrats use the Internet; Republicans use the Internet.  I have a feeling both Democrats and Republicans do their share of online shopping.  And we believe this shouldn’t be an issue that's bogged down on partisan politics.  So we urge Congress to move.  There’s a lot of pending legislation up there, a lot of pieces of legislation that could do a lot of good on this front.  So we urge them to move quickly on that.
Q    Mayor Emanuel in Chicago has a primary on the 24th.  Does the President have any plans to campaign for him?
MR. SCHULTZ:  Katie, as you know, we are looking forward to our trip to Chicago next week.  I don't have any scheduling updates for you in terms of the details of what’s going to be on that trip. 
Q    I wanted to follow up on a Daily Beast article.  Did the White House wait a month to stage a rescue after British intelligence officials passed along information about the American hostages’ location last summer? 
MR. SCHULTZ:  No.  I believe your colleague asked my colleague yesterday if there was any sort of delay, and there was not.  You can be assured that as soon as the President was comfortable with the intelligence provided and the plan from our military leaders, there was no delay and the President ordered the mission. 
Q    What about the reports there was a second failed U.S. rescue attempt?  Did something go wrong with the rescue attempt while the Jordanian airstrikes were going on?
MR. SCHULTZ:  I haven't seen anything on that. 
Q    What is the back story on the -- there’s a video with Obama that Buzzfeed put out today on Facebook.  Can you fill us in on how that came about?  Was that part of the interview he did with Buzzfeed, or is it something you guys -- you all wanted him to do?
MR. SCHULTZ:  Darlene, that was conducted after the interview earlier this week.  I can tell you we're about up to about -- before takeoff -- about 5.7 million views online since the launch of it at noon, a few hours ago.  So we're pleased at the response it's getting.  We've noticed significant ripple effects across social media, so we're pleased.
The enrollment deadline for the Affordable Care Act ends on the 15th.  In the past, we’ve had a lot of success finding audiences in these sorts of channels to get them to sign up and visit the website.  So we believe this won’t be any different.
Q    Was the video the White House’s idea, though?  Or whose idea was it?
MR. SCHULTZ:  I’m not sure, actually. 
Q    There’s some legislation on the Hill limiting the President’s ability to transfer detainees.  Does the White House have a position on that?
MR. SCHULTZ:  Joy, thank you for the question.  As you know, our position is that the continued operation of Guantanamo Bay the facility there, weakens our national security, and must be closed.  We believe this bill puts more constraints on a process that should be actually working faster.  And so we oppose this legislation, and the President would veto it.
Q    So this will be -- President Obama will be back on the fundraising circuit.  This is his first fundraiser for the 2016 cycle, tomorrow?
MR. SCHULTZ:  Yes.
Q    Is he looking forward to getting back on the fundraising trail?
MR. SCHULTZ:  I have not spoken to the President about that. Yes.  (Laughter.) 
Q    He’s not raising money for himself anymore.  How does he look at his role going ahead into the final couple years of his presidency? 
MR. SCHULTZ:  I think as he’s talked about, he has run his final campaign.  Nobody is more pleased about that than the First Lady.  And his focus, as he’s talked about, is we are just kicking off our fourth quarter of the presidency.  As he’s said many times, we have a lot of important work to be done, much of which is going to happen tomorrow in terms of the priority of cybersecurity.  And so we’re looking forward to that.
Q    -- the fundraiser will be?  There were some reports that they were having trouble selling tickets.
MR. SCHULTZ:  I have no idea, Katie, but would refer you to the DNC for that information.
Q    Where is the President staying when he’s in Palm Springs?
MR. SCHULTZ:  At a private residence. 
Q    (Inaudible.)
MR. SCHULTZ:  We’ll see if we can get you that information.
Q    Do you think there’s any chance the President would be having any meetings this weekend about the presidential library in any way?  Talking about fundraising, or planning, or design, perhaps?
MR. SCHULTZ:  I haven’t seen that on the President’s schedule.
Q    Is there anything else about the weekend that you can or cannot walk us through in terms of who he’ll be hanging out with, what he’ll be doing in his free time?  This is -- I think the Obamas do a trip like they -- Mrs. Obama and the girls usually use President’s Weekend for separate vacation purposes, but I mean, can you sort of talk us through what he’s looking forward to doing this weekend?
MR. SCHULTZ:  I think you have seen the pretty busy, robust schedule for tomorrow.  Beyond that, I don’t have a -- again, I would not -- for your planning, Margaret, I would not anticipate a robust public schedule for the duration, the remainder of the holiday weekend.
Q    What about the private schedule?
Q    Can we assume golf will be --
MR. SCHULTZ:  Jeff, the President has been known to enjoy golf in this area of the country before.  I would not be surprised if he does so again this weekend. 
Q    Thank you.
MR. SCHULTZ:  Thank you, guys.
END

	4:10 P.M. EST
The White House
Office of the Press Secretary
Aboard Air Force One

	En Route Atlanta, Georgia 
11:03 A.M. EDT
MR. SCHULTZ:  Good afternoon.  Welcome aboard Air Force One. As you know, we are en route to Atlanta, where the President is going to talk about the rising challenge in this country of helping students afford a higher education and manage their debt.
Right before we left, the President did sign a memorandum directing the Department of Education and other federal agencies to work across the federal government to do more to help borrowers afford their monthly loan payments through 19 new executive actions.  That memo requires a new single system for student complaints, contractors to respond when borrowers fall behind in their payments, and recommendations for other policy changes to protect borrowers.
The actions we’re announcing today will help reach our goal of providing an affordable, quality education for all Americans, underscored in the Student Aid Bill of Rights, based upon the fundamental principle that every student in this country deserves access to a quality, affordable education at an institution that’s cutting costs and increasing learning.
With that, I am happy to take your questions.
Q    Eric, the Admiral who joined the President this morning -- what can you tell us about him?
MR. SCHULTZ:  The Admiral is a proud and active alum of Georgia Tech University, so he is joining us in that capacity.
Q    And on a different topic, Hillary Clinton is going to give some remarks today publicly for the first time since the whole swirling email controversy.  Is there anything specific you’re hoping to hear from her?
MR. SCHULTZ:  I don’t have anything for you on a press conference that hasn’t happened yet.
Q    Can I ask some Hillary follow-ups?  Is the expectation that in her disclosure of all the emails that she has asked the State Department to turn over that we’ll be seeing emails between her and the President?
MR. SCHULTZ:  As Josh acknowledged yesterday, there are some emails that were sent and received between the Secretary of State and the President of the United States in that first term.  Those emails, A, would have been preserved, as Josh has said, under the Presidential Records Act, based on the President’s email; and, two, have now been turned over to the State Department for review for release.  So the State Department, by matter of course, goes through those documents and judges for a host of criteria what’s appropriate for release.  So I’m going to let that process play out before I prejudge it.
Q    But one of the criteria would be if the President exerts privilege over them in some way.  Is that something that you guys plan to do, or do you think you’re happy with the State Department releasing any email between the President and Secretary Clinton?
MR. SCHULTZ:  Justin, I think you’re jumping about 10,000 steps ahead of where we are, so let’s just let the State Department review that process under their regular order and then we can make a determination from there.
Q    Eric, the Democrats that are on the House Benghazi panel have asked -- there is some 800 or so pages of emails that have already been turned over to the Benghazi committee -- they want those emails to be prioritized and released -- reviewed for release first, before the other 55,000 pages.  Is that a request that the White House supports?
MR. SCHULTZ:  Josh, I hadn’t seen that.  But, again, the review of that set of documents has to go through the State Department, so I’m going to defer to their folks and their team so they can evaluate it under the proper criteria before releasing those.
Q    Does the President have his own private email, a nongovernmental email that he uses occasionally or at all?  And has he used it to conduct government business?  And if so, would he be subject to the policies that Josh outlined?
MR. SCHULTZ:  Mike, both the President and my colleague, Josh Earnest, have addressed this in the past couple of days.
Q    -- addressed it.
MR. SCHULTZ:  Well, in engaging questions on the security and integrity of the President’s email, we have made clear that part of the security precautions we take around that email account is not talking about it much publicly.  So I’m not going to be --
Q    I’m not asking you to talk about the email account.  I’m asking about whether he has a private email account.  That’s a different question than asking about the secured -- and I’m not asking for what it is, although if you want to give it to me, I’m fine with that.
MR. SCHULTZ:  Mike, again, I’m not going to be in a position to discuss the President’s email account.  I will tell you that anything sent or received there is preserved for a couple of different reasons.  One, nobody understands more the scholarly value of that material than the President of the United States.  As you saw a few days ago, the President took his family to see President Lincoln’s Second Inaugural Address.  So we understand the scholarly value.  We also understand the rules and guidelines that dictate this sort of material and we abide by them.
Q    Yesterday the President -- Josh said that the President had, in fact, received those emails, as you mentioned today.  When he is receiving emails from other members of government or other world leaders that are from .gov or other official accounts, was it not at all weird to him or questionable that his emails from Secretary Clinton were not as such?
MR. SCHULTZ:  The President’s expectation when sending or receiving an email from any Cabinet Secretary is that’s going to be preserved, maintained, and archived in accordance with the Federal Records Act.
Q    But given he knew it was a personal email, that didn't seem weird to him that someone was emailing the President of the United States from a Clintonmail server address?
MR. SCHULTZ:  Again, the President’s expectation in real time is that those emails are archived and preserved.
Q    Eric, are you and your colleagues sick of answering questions about Hillary Clinton and what emails she did or didn't send?
MR. SCHULTZ:  Again, our view is that we take these guidelines seriously.  We take compliance very seriously, so we are happy to engage you in questions on this today or tomorrow.
Q    Can I ask about the college thing?
MR. SCHULTZ:  You can.
Q    Wait till you hear my question.  Seems like small potatoes.  I mean is this because Congress is in the hands of the Republicans and you can't really do much more than create a new complaint system?  That doesn't seem to address in any sort of fundamental way the challenges of somebody paying back a $50,000 loan.
MR. SCHULTZ:  I guess I would disagree with your characterization of this.  I don't think the 1.4 million student loan borrowers in the state of Georgia, for example, who have accumulated more than $44 billion left in outstanding student loan debt would call these sorts of improvements small potatoes. I do agree with you there is lots more to be done in addition to what we're talking about specifically today.  I think that's why the President has called on Congress to support his plan to allow for a free community college for two years for responsible Americans.  That is why we’ve called for an expansion of the Pell program.  That is why we're looking for increased investments in our first in the world expansion, where we seed innovation and scaling what works in higher education. 
So I agree with you this is a priority.  I agree with you there’s lots to be done.  We think the steps being announced today are an important step.  But surely -- hopefully those in Congress share your drive to do more.
Q    Can I ask about Iran real quick?  Foreign Minister Zarif today said that the letter sent by Republicans was evidence that the U.S. was unreliable in the negotiations.  This was sort of a break from what we had heard from him yesterday where he had sort of dismissed the Republicans’ letter.  So I’m wondering if you guys interpreted that as him sort of playing to the hard line audience that he was speaking to, or if you guys are worried that this letter has not tangibly damaged or jeopardized the negotiations?
MR. SCHULTZ:  I think we feel like this was a blatant, flagrant, and partisan attempt to interfere with the negotiations.  As my colleagues have said, we have one President at a time in the United States, and that President is charged with conducting our foreign policy.  As the Vice President said quite eloquently last night, the letter that was released yesterday is without precedent from the past two centuries based on the role that the United States Senate has played.  So we feel like that letter was reckless, was irresponsible, was misguided, was a partisan attempt to undermine the President’s ability to negotiate with a foreign government.
Q    Has it been effective in that goal, though?  Are you guys seeing tangible concerns being expressed through the negotiating?
MR. SCHULTZ:  I haven’t seen any data on that.  I don't have a real-time update on the actual negotiations, which, again, are sort of happening in real time.  So I don't have any update for you on that.
Q    Let me tackle that from a different direction.  The President’s argument to Congress has been that if these talks are unsuccessful there shouldn’t be any excuse for Iran to say this is on the U.S. as opposed to on Iran.  But between the Bibi speech and this letter and the sanctions legislation in Congress, if these talks now fail, doesn't Iran already have a pretty persuasive argument that it’s because of Congress that this deal fell apart, not because Iran walked away from the table?
MR. SCHULTZ:  Well, I do think you’ve raised an important point, Josh, that the negotiations that the United States is a part of are not bilateral with just Iran.  We are involved in a complicated, sensitive negotiation with Russia, with the United Kingdom, with France and Germany, the European Union, and China.
So you are right that these are sensitive and these are complicated.  And so if there’s going to be 47 members of the same political party who attempt to inject themselves in an attempt to undermine the negotiation, we do feel like it’s misguided.
Q    So what is the White House doing, particularly with its partners in these talks, to sort of address any concerns the White House has about what’s happened?  Like are partners asking questions about what does this mean?  What is the White House actively doing to sort of talk to people about this?
MR. SCHULTZ:  I don’t have any conversations or communications specifically with the P5-plus-1 group to read out to you.  I can say that through the State Department, the negotiations to reach a deal continue, they continue in earnest, and they continue with an urgency as the deadline approaches.
Q    It’s obvious there’s a real rift here now between Republicans in the Senate and the White House.  What is the White House going to do for its part to try to address this rift or repair this rift, if anything?
MR. SCHULTZ:  Well, I think a couple of things.  One is it’s important to realize that, historically, the President has the role of executing on our foreign policy.  So whether that’s looking at basing agreements for troops around the world, whether that is the agreement to rid Syria of chemical weapons -- a framework that we establish with Russia -- or whether that is a withdrawal of troops in Afghanistan, those are agreements that the President of the United States, the executive branch, worked on and coordinated with foreign governments around the world.  So I think that’s an important piece of history.
And then the second thing I’d say is that there is a robust role for Congress.  There’s an oversight role, there’s a consultative role.  The reason we have such severe sanctions right now on Iran that brought them to the negotiating table is because of those sanctions.  So we are on constant communication with the Hill, but what we don’t think is a good idea is a partisan attempt to undermine the negotiations.
Q    Can I ask about Senator Menendez really quickly?  I know that -- I’ve heard Josh’s spiel about how you guys can’t comment on whether or not an indictment is coming, but we heard from Kathleen Sebelius last night that she had been interviewed by prosecutors about Senator Menendez and the donor in question. I’m wondering, do you know if anybody on the White House staff has been interviewed by federal prosecutors?
MR. SCHULTZ:  I don't.
Q    Would the White House cooperate with such an investigation, or is that a situation where if a meeting between a donor and a White House staffer had come up that you guys would exert any sort of privilege?
MR. SCHULTZ:  I think you are presupposing a lot of facts that aren’t necessarily been stipulated, so I’m not going to have anything to engage you on that hypothetical.
Q    Eric, on the situation in Myanmar and the protestors that have been beaten by police while demonstrating against an educational law.  This is the country that the President has repeatedly held up an as example of moving towards democratization, so is Myanmar still on the right track?
MR. SCHULTZ:  I saw those reports.  We, of course, deplore any violence.  The values of human rights and fundamental freedoms are something that the President holds dear, something that this White House takes very seriously, and something that we work to spread around the world.
Q    And I guess on one other foreign policy question, the President and his aides have said that there hasn’t been a decision on whether to send lethal aid to Ukraine.  Germany’s ambassador to the U.S. told the AP yesterday that in the meeting with Merkel the President agreed to hold off and not to send lethal aid to Ukraine.  So was the German ambassador incorrect in that statement?
MR. SCHULTZ:  Josh, I saw the story from your colleague.  The truth is we do not have an update from when the President addressed this with most of you in the room with Chancellor Merkel there. 
The President believes, first and foremost, that this is a situation that is going to have to be resolved diplomatically.  That’s for a couple of different reasons.  First, increasing arms and lethal aid to the region would only increase bloodshed; two, nobody doubts Russia’s military capacity to expand its military presence in the region; and three, we don’t want to see increased bloodshed --
Q    It sounds like you’re making the case against sending lethal aid, so is that a conclusion that’s been reached by this administration?
MR. SCHULTZ:  I'm sorry, I didn’t get a chance to finish my answer.  But the President has also said we are constantly reevaluating the situation there, constantly looking at new options. And so I don’t have an update for you on that at this time, but --
Q    So when you said it remains where it was, where it was was he said that he hadn’t yet made a decision.  Right?  That is what he said during the Merkel thing.  So it remains that he has not yet made a decision? 
MR. SCHULTZ:  Again, the President has said a couple of different times why he believes this is a conflict that has to be resolved at the negotiating table.  One, adding lethal aid only increases bloodshed; two, nobody doubts Russia’s ability to increase their military presence in the region.
So that’s why we’re trying to exhaust diplomatic agreements; that’s why we believe that Russia has to live up to its agreements in the Minsk agreements that were agreed to repeatedly, several times now.
Q    Senator’s Menendez and Corker sent the President a letter yesterday asking for a report that under law was due on February 15th, and the report is supposed to spell out the President’s strategy on defensive lethal aid to Ukraine.  And I'm wondering if you have any update about when that report might be delivered to Congress?
MR. SCHULTZ:  Roberta, I will be honest with you, I haven’t seen that letter.  Again, the President’s thinking on this I think is fairly well-known.  There’s nothing different than when he addressed this with Chancellor Merkel.  He also addressed this with CBS over the weekend.  And I think I tried to just outline where the President’s head is on this.
Q    May I ask real quickly about the statement on Scott Walker that came out last night?  Irrespective of the merits, is this going to be something that we’re going to see the President do more, kind of dip his toe into 2016 and the Republican primary process by talking about issues that are coming up with some of their candidates?
MR. SCHULTZ:  I'm not sure anything we’ve done is irrespective of the merits, so I sort of reject that framing of the question.  I think that this is an issue that the President has spoken out on repeatedly, whether it's in Wisconsin, whether it's been in Michigan, or Ohio.  The President believes that unions have been the backbone of our middle class and helped build our economy, our workforce, and that we should be doing everything possible to help workers join unions and build unions, not tear them apart.
Q    But this is at least the third time that the President has spoken about one of the potential Republican 2016 contenders. Is this something that he’s going to continue to do, to sort of inject himself into the 2016 race?
MR. SCHULTZ:  Roberta, I saw a lot of the political commentary speculating that that’s what we were doing, but our bottom line is this is an issue that we have spoken out whenever it rears its ugly head.  And the President believes that unions have played a central role in building the middle class and raising workers’ wages.  That’s why, instead of rolling back workers’ rights, states, including Wisconsin, should be expanding workers’ rights, like raising the minimum wage and paid sick leave. 
Thank you, guys. 
END

	11:20 A.M. EDT
The White House
Office of the Press Secretary
En Route Atlanta, Georgia
1:26 P.M. EDT
MR. EARNEST: Good afternoon and welcome aboard Air Force One as we embark on a 24-hour trip to Atlanta and Tampa, where the President will be engaged on two significant national security priorities.  The first is stepping up our whole-of-government approach to the Ebola outbreak in West Africa.  And the second is leading an international coalition to degrade and ultimately destroy ISIL.
First, in Atlanta, the President will meet with doctors, nurses, scientists and other leading medical experts at the CDC who have, at the President’s direction, been focused on responding to the Ebola outbreak since it was first reported back in March.  Many of you saw the reports this morning that the President has directed the Department of Defense to deploy significant logistical engineering and training support to expand the capacity of the ongoing response.  This order from the President is consistent with his view that responding to the Ebola outbreak is a top national security priority. 
Many of you may be interested to know that this morning, before departing the White House, the President met briefly in the Oval Office with Dr. Kent Brantly and his wife, Amber.  Dr. Brantly serves as the Medical Director for the Samaritan’s Purse Ebola Consolidated Case Management Center in Monrovia, Libya -- Liberia.  And as was reported, he tested positive for the Ebola virus back in July.  Dr. Brantly was transported back to Emory University Hospital in Atlanta on August 2nd.  He was treated and released on August 21st, free of Ebola.  Dr. Brantly is in Washington, D.C., to testify before Congress today regarding the Ebola outbreak.
Second, tomorrow, in Tampa, the President will visit MacDill Air Force Base -- it’s the headquarters of Central Command -- to discuss the plan for building an international coalition to degrade and destroy ISIL.  After announcing his decision to broaden our efforts against ISIL in his address to the nation, the President asked his team to arrange for him to travel to Central Command to get an in-person briefing from General Austin and other CENTCOM personnel about some of the operational details of the military effort that the President has ordered. 
General Austin has returned from the region to lead the briefing.  Secretary Hagel will participate as well.  However, this is just one aspect of the President’s activities at MacDill.  He’ll also meet with senior national representatives from those nations located within Central Command’s scope of responsibility.  Many of these nations will be an important part of the international coalition that the President will be leading against ISIL.
In addition, the Commander-in-Chief is also looking forward to spending time with the servicemen and women of MacDill Air Force Base and share with them the gratitude of the nation for their service and sacrifice to our country and to our security. 
Now, you also know -- sorry about that -- you also know that prior to departing the White House today, the President met with General John Allen, the Special Presidential Envoy for the Global Coalition to Counter the Islamic State of Iraq and the Levant, and Brett McGurk, who is the Deputy Special Presidential Envoy. 
The President underscored the importance of maximizing coordination with allies and partners to build a strong coalition with broad international participation.  The President stressed that the comprehensive approach to degrade and ultimately destroy ISIL requires a wide range of political, diplomatic, military, economic and other efforts.  He also expressed his deep appreciation for the work and sacrifice of U.S. servicemen and women, as well as the diplomats engaged in the struggle to counter ISIL.  The President thanked General Allen for his many years of service in uniform and for continuing since his retirement to serve his country in a civilian capacity.
So with all of that, thank you for indulging me.  Let me go to your questions.
Q    Josh, I wanted to ask you about General Dempsey’s testimony today.  He said that under certain circumstances he could see himself asking the President to allow advisers on the ground to participate in combat operations.  I wonder if the President is open to that, if that recommendation would come from General Dempsey.
MR. EARNEST:  Jim, I think, as was clear from General Dempsey’s remarks, that he was referring to a hypothetical scenario in which there might be a future situation in which he might make a tactical recommendation to the President as it relates to the use of ground troops.
It’s the responsibility of the President’s military advisers to plan and consider all the wide range of contingencies.  It’s also the responsibility of the Commander-in-Chief to set out a clear policy.  And the President has been clear about what that policy is.  He reiterated it on a number of occasions; most recently, I believe in his address to the nation on Wednesday night, which is that the President does not believe that it would be in the best interest of our national security to deploy American ground troops in a combat role in Iraq and Syria.  That policy has not changed.
Q    So under no circumstances would there be boots on the ground?
MR. EARNEST:  Well, precision is important here.  And what the President has been very clear about is the role of American forces in Iraq.  The President has deployed American servicemen and women -- a limited number of them -- to serve in an advise-and-assist capacity, to staff joint operation centers, to defend the embassy in Baghdad and the consulate in Erbil.  So there are American service personnel in Iraq.
There are also, obviously, American servicemen and women who are engaged in some of the air combat operations, right?  There are more than 150 strikes, I believe, that have been announced by Central Command that have taken place at the direction of the President. 
But what he’s been very specific and precise about is that he will not deploy ground troops in a combat role into Iraq or Syria. 
Q    -- he would say no to General Dempsey under that, the hypothetical that General Dempsey laid out.
MR. EARNEST:  Well, it’s also clear from General Dempsey’s remarks that he has confidence in the strategy that's already been put in place.  It shouldn’t be a surprise that he has confidence in that strategy because he has advised the President over the course of the last few months that they’ve been working on this -- on the strategy.  So the strategy that is in place is one that has the confidence of General Dempsey.  At least the military aspect of the strategy that has been deployed so far has resulted in some important benefits.
We’ve talked about how the use of American military air power has been successful in backing up Iraqi security forces as they blunted an advance on Erbil a few months ago, or at least earlier this summer.  American airstrikes were instrumental in supporting Iraqi security forces as they retook the Mosul Dam.  We’ve also seen the precise deployment of American military air power to prevent humanitarian disasters in Sinjar Mountain and Amerli, where ISIL fighters were poised to carry out a genocide against religious or ethnic minorities in Iraq. 
So this is a strategy that's been deployed with successful results so far.  But as we broaden out this campaign to degrade and ultimately destroy ISIL, the President and his team are insistent on working with the support of an international coalition to succeed in this mission.  And the President is confident that this mission can be successfully executed without deploying American servicemen and women in a combat role on the ground in Iraq and Syria.
Q    Josh, can you further characterize the President’s visit to MacDill tomorrow?  Is it a decision meeting?  Is it a tactical meeting?  Both?  What does he expect to accomplish -- hope to accomplish?
MR. EARNEST:  You’ll hear from the President himself after he does all the things that he’s doing at MacDill with CENTCOM personnel.  It's important to remember that in addition to the briefing that he'll receive from General Austin and other senior officials at CENTCOM, that he’ll spend some time with those who are working to build this broader international coalition and spend some time with our servicemen and women who have made so many sacrifices for our country.  So it's important to remember that this is a visit where he’s got a lot on the agenda.
Q    Back to the President’s -- back to General Dempsey’s comments.  You laid out the President’s policy and said it hasn’t changed.  But did his remarks today indicate that maybe the Pentagon is not on the same page with the White House on this?
MR. EARNEST:  Well, I'm confident that if you asked General Dempsey if he’s on the same page as the Commander-in-Chief that he would say that he is.  But I will let him speak for himself.
Q    Josh, on Ebola.  Can you shed some light on the 3,000 troops that will be sent?  What will they be doing?  And most specifically, will any of them be handling victims, either alive or dead, and themselves put at risk for contracting it?
MR. EARNEST:  That's a good question.  For very specific details, I'd refer you to the Department of Defense.  There’s also a factsheet that I can share with you.  But as a general matter, let me say that the Department of Defense has significant logistical capabilities.  And those who are trying to respond to this outbreak in West Africa are operating in a very difficult environment.  And the use of Department of Defense personnel and assets to strengthen the logistical network in place that's supporting that effort will significantly expand the capacity of that effort.
We also anticipate that the commitment of DOD personnel and resources will galvanize the international community; that people around the world, knowing that the Department of Defense is involved in this effort, can have some more confidence that the effort is well run, that it will be well executed, and that they can contribute to the effort knowing that they’ll have the necessary resources to succeed.
As it relates to your specific question, Department of Defense personnel will not be responsible for providing direct patient care.  What they’re doing is they will be serving in a function that will allow them to capitalize on their unique capabilities to enhance logistical support, to provide some training and also some engineering support as well.
Q    Josh, can you explain where those 3,000 troops will be?  Is it primarily in Liberia or will they be spread out among all of the countries that are most affected by this?
MR. EARNEST:  Again, for a detailed answer to this question I refer you to the Department of Defense.  But I know that there is an Intermediate Staging Base, I believe it's called, that will be stood up in Senegal.  Senegal, you’ll note, is not one of the countries that currently is affected by Ebola -- or it's not a country in which anyone has contracted Ebola at this point.  So there will be a substantial contingent of these 3,000 Department of Defense personnel that will be at this Intermediate Staging Base.  There will be some other locations in Liberia where American military personnel will also be located. 
But, again, they will be providing some logistical support, some training, even some construction or engineering assistance that they can provide, but they will not be providing direct patient care.
Q    And in terms of the funding, the factsheet and your colleagues on the call last night said that the DOD would be requesting a reprogramming of $500 million.  The word “request” indicates that maybe that's not a done deal.  Is that true, or is that money definitely going towards that?
MR. EARNEST:  Let me take a crack at answering your question.  There is a request that has been made by the administration for supporting this effort, and we're confident we’ll have the resources that we need to carry out this specific mission.
Let me say one other thing.  This is a bit of a tangent, but this is also an important thing I wanted to convey today.  The other thing that the House of Representatives is currently debating is whether or not to give the President or this administration Title 10 authority that would allow the Department of Defense to play an active role in training Syrian opposition fighters.  We are pleased with the bipartisan support that we’ve received so far for that authority, and we know -- we’re pleased with the progress that that legislation that would give this authority is making through the House.
There’s been some discussion about language that is included in this proposal by the Chairman of the House Arms Services Committee, Buck McKeon.  It’s important for people to understand that the language that the Chairman has inserted is something that is the result of bipartisan efforts to advance this proposal.  It’s primarily related to some oversight in reporting functions.  The President and his administration across a wide range of areas has demonstrated a willingness and even a desire to work with Congress as they conduct their proper oversight.
So as a general matter, let me just say that the language suggested by Chairman McKeon is one that has bipartisan support, and is one that is supported by this administration.  And we’re hopeful that Congress will act quickly to pass this measure and give the administration the authority that is needed to begin the effort to train Syrian opposition fighters.  We have secured commitments from the Saudis to host this training operation, and we’d like to move quickly to set up this operation.  And we’re hopeful that Congress will act quickly to give the administration the authority that’s necessary to do it.
Q    And one last one on Ebola.  Why did it take so long to get this big effort underway?  And is it a sign that the United States and the President see this threat as growing and being a bigger national security item than even he said a few weeks ago?
MR. EARNEST:  You’ll hear more from the President and from some of the experts at the CDC today on this.  The fact is, the CDC has responded aggressively to the situation since the initial reports of an Ebola outbreak became public back in March.  So this has been a sustained effort that has been underway for some time.  I mentioned during the briefing yesterday that in response to this Ebola outbreak, the CDC executed the largest ever deployment of CDC personnel to try to respond to it. 
But there’s no question that what we’re seeing now is the largest ever outbreak of Ebola.  And because it is a top national security priority, the President has directed the Department of Defense to significantly ramp up the kind of assistance they’re providing to those who are trying to respond to this effort. 
Q    But couldn’t a ramp-up two weeks ago have maybe prevented a lot more deaths?
MR. EARNEST:  Well, Jeff, what we’re seeing is -- and what we have seen from the United States is an aggressive response to this situation that started all the way back in March.  And the reason for that is simply -- well, I think there are two reasons for that.  The first is the President has identified it as a top national security priority. 
The second thing it illustrates, however, is that the United States is the world’s indispensable nation.  And the United States, and our military in particular, has unique capabilities and a capacity to offer assistance in very remote parts of the world.  And we do anticipate that it will galvanize the global health community and nations around the world as they consider how and whether to contribute to this Ebola response effort. 
So the President is pleased to lead this country as we play a leading role in the global response to this Ebola outbreak.
Q    Josh, in terms of timing, do you know when those 17 treatment facilities will be up and running?  And also, do you have a sense of how long those 3,000 military personnel might be deployed to this region?
MR. EARNEST:  I don’t have that information, but the Department of Defense may be able to offer up some more details on that.
Q    Josh, quickly, just a quick question.  Do you expect to have anything for us tonight more on the meeting tomorrow?  Any conference call, statement, or anything further?
MR. EARNEST:  No, I don’t anticipate that.
Stephen.
Q    On Russia.  The ruble is falling to record lows.  Is this a goal of U.S. sanctions policy and do you see this building any political pressure on Putin?  You spoke last week about striking at his inner circle.
MR. EARNEST:  Our goal from the beginning has been to impose economic costs and to isolate Russia for their actions in Ukraine.  These reports of the declining value of their currency is consistent with the impact that we’ve seen thus far of the sanctions regime that’s been put in place by the United States in close coordination with our allies in Europe.  And it is evidence that Russia is paying a price for their destabilizing actions in Ukraine.
Thanks, everybody.  Buckle up for landing.
END 

	1:44 P.M. EDT
The White House
Office of the Press Secretary
Aboard Air Force One

	En Route Columbia, South Carolina
**Please see below for a correction to the transcript, marked with an asterisk.
11:11 A.M. EST
MR. EARNEST:  Good morning, everybody.  Welcome aboard Air Force One.  You may be able to feel the nostalgia pulsing through Air Force One this morning.  Today is the first opportunity that the President has traveled back to South Carolina since his victory in the South Carolina primary back in January of 2008 -- January 26th, to be precise.
And many of you know that I worked for the President in Iowa in his caucus campaign through all of -- or most of 2007, early 2008.  Surely after the Iowa caucus, I had the chance to go to South Carolina and work for the last three weeks on the South Carolina primary.  It was a tumultuous three weeks during the campaign.  My first day in South Carolina, Barack Obama was endorsed by previous Democratic standard-bearer, Senator John Kerry.  The day after that, of course Senator Obama was defeated in the New Hampshire primary by Senator Clinton.  And then just a couple weeks after that, obviously the President won a resounding victory in the South Carolina Democratic primary.
It was notable because it was the first chance that -- or at least one of the very first powerful expressions from the emerging Obama coalition in the Democratic primary.  You had African American voters, you had young people and white Democratic voters all showing up to support his campaign.  So it was a very powerful expression of the kind of campaign that President Obama set out to build early on.  And it’s not an exaggeration to say that without that strong performance that January -- that Saturday in January in early 2008, that there would not be a President Barack Obama.
So, anyway, I’m feeling particularly nostalgic about this trip and about my three weeks during the South Carolina primary.  I know the President is looking forward to his visit down here as well.
The other reason for the nostalgia today is this is obviously Senior Advisor Dan Pfeiffer’s last trip on Air Force One.  Dan is somebody that many of us have worked with for a long time, going back to the campaign.  And Dan is somebody who has inspired deep respect and loyalty among his colleagues at the White House.  Obviously the President shares that respect for Dan as well.  Dan’s intellect stands out, but despite the rough exterior that he often projects, often to many of you, those of you who have gotten to know him know that Dan is one of the most thoughtful and generous people.  He’s certainly been a very thoughtful and generous colleague during the many years that I’ve worked with him.  And we certainly wish Dan well as he enters civilian life, so to speak.
So the last thing I’ll point out before we get to your questions is we’ve got another jobs report today.  As we say every time that there’s a jobs report -- this was true even in the early stages of the presidency when the jobs reports often brought a lot of bad news; this jobs report happens to bring a lot of good news -- but the thing that we are looking at in these reports are not just the monthly numbers but the broader trends.  And so there are a couple of broader trends that I wanted to point out to you.
The first is, is that over the last six months, an average of 293,000 jobs have been created every month.  That’s the strongest monthly average in a six-month period that we’ve seen since 2000.  Over the course of the last year, 3.3 million * private sector jobs have been created.  That, again, is the strongest job growth that we’ve seen in a year-long period also since 2000. 
The other interesting statistic I saw was that over the last -- we’ve now had 12 consecutive months of more than 200,000 private sector jobs being created.  That is the longest streak of consecutive months of 200,000 or more jobs since 1977, so in 37 years.  So that’s another statistic.
The other trend I wanted to note was in the manufacturing sector.  We’ve now had 19 straight months of positive job growth in the manufacturing sector.  That is the longest stretch in quite some time.  And over the last 60 months, 877,000 jobs have been created in the manufacturing sector.  So we’re obviously very pleased with the job performance in that sector as well.
With that long windup, why don’t we get to your questions.
Q    The President had his first remarks this morning in response to the Ferguson report that came out earlier this week.  It was brief, so I wondered if you could expand on that a little bit, in particular what his reaction was to no charges against Officer Wilson.  And also, there are some emails in there that actually made some racist comments about him in particular, and what his response to that was.
MR. EARNEST:  Well, as the President pointed out, he was not surprised by the details that were included in the Ferguson report.  He described I think what he saw -- or the report described what he saw as an environment that is not typical in law enforcement communities across the country, but it’s not isolated either.  And it reflects the kind of work that does need to be done in law enforcement agencies and in communities across the country to inspire greater trust between law enforcement officers in the communities that they’re sworn to serve and protect.
The President, in reaction to this, has established a 21st Century Policing Task Force that just this week came forward with some very specific recommendations about what law enforcement agencies across the country can do to strengthen the bond of trust between their officers and leaders in their community.  And the President believes very strongly -- and I think this is indicative of law enforcement leaders in the vast majority of agencies across the country -- that law enforcement officers have a responsibility to ensure that every single member of the communities they serve are properly protected; not just some of those members of the community, but all of the members of the community.
And what we will find -- and the President is confident in this, and law enforcement experts tell us this -- that as law enforcement agencies are better able to demonstrate some accountability and some trust with the communities that they protect, not only does that inspire greater trust in those communities, it also improves the ability of law enforcement officers to fight crime, and it also ensures that those law enforcement officers can do their job more safely.  This is very dangerous work, and it is an honorable profession.  And the vast majority of law enforcement officers are out there selflessly trying to serve their community, and that is worthy of our respect and praise.
We want to make sure that all of the agencies are doing everything that they can to ensure that they’re doing everything possible to apply best practices that other communities have learned about how to build trust between law enforcement officers and the communities they serve and protect.
Q    Did he have a response in particular to those two things -- Officer Wilson not being charged, and also the mention of him in some of those racist emails?
MR. EARNEST:  I haven’t heard a specific reaction from him, but the President does have confidence in the investigations that were conducted by the Department of Justice, both into the individual case but also into some of the broader problems that were exposed in the Ferguson Police Department.  So I think the results of that investigation speak for themselves.
Q    Would he like to see any personnel changes, like the police chief stepping down?  Some people have called for that.
MR. EARNEST:  Well, I think the President would stand by the conclusions of the report and would stand by the recommendations that were made by the Department of Justice.
Q    Josh, AP had a story yesterday about the White House Counsel’s Office and Secretary Clinton’s emails.  Was the White House Counsel’s Office aware that Secretary Clinton was using a private email account and that her emails were not being retained in real time by the State Department?  When did you learn it?  What’s your reaction been?  And did the White House approve of her use of private email during the start of her tenure?
MR. EARNEST:  That’s a lot there, but not necessarily a series of questions that I haven’t answered a couple of different times this week.  The truth is, I don’t have a whole lot new to shed on this.
The fact is, the administration has given guidance to all of our employees that they should use their official email address when they’re conducting official government work.  And the administration takes seriously the responsibility that agencies have to comply with the Federal Records Act.  That’s certainly why the State Department took the step of asking all former Secretaries of State to turn over any personal email that related to their official work at the State Department.
It’s my understanding, again, based on public comments that we’ve seen from Secretary Clinton’s team, that they’ve complied with that request, as they should.  I understand that the State Department has also already, months ago, provided some of that documentation to Congress in response to a specific request from Congress.  I haven’t, however, been in the situation where I’ve been asked about Secretary Clinton’s specific request that the State Department take the necessary steps to make those emails public.  That certainly would go above and beyond the requirements of the Federal Records Act, obviously, and I do understand that the State Department has already started working to review those records to comply with that request.
Obviously, they have -- that’s complicated work.  They want to make sure that they’re not revealing information that is sensitive, even if it’s not classified.  But I would anticipate that they will go about the work of reviewing those emails to determine what can be released, and that they will comply with Secretary Clinton’s request to make that email public.
Q    But did the Counsel’s Office know, yes or no, that she was using private email?
MR. EARNEST:  The truth is, as I’ve said before, I don’t know the answer to that.  Obviously, there were senior White House officials who were emailing with Secretary Clinton while she was in office, and I haven’t spoken to them.  I didn’t receive one of those emails.  I think it is reasonable to expect that they noticed that she was not using a “.gov” email address.  But I think they also had the expectation, as they do for all employees of the administration, that they’re properly complying with the Federal Records Act.
And again, if Secretary Clinton’s team did what they said they did, which is reviewed her email and turned over all of the personal email relating to her official work as the Secretary of State, then they are in compliance with the Federal Records Act.
Q    Josh, there are, though, a couple of -- several questions that you have not answered regarding the White House and Secretary Clinton’s emails, and maybe we can go through a couple of them and see if you can answer them today.  And one is, when the President learned that Secretary Clinton was exclusively using a non-government email and had a server in her home in New York.
MR. EARNEST:  Well, I have no idea when the President first learned of that.  I wouldn’t be surprised, however, if he had learned about that by reading the newspaper. 
Q    So it’s fair to say that he learned about that this week?  That he was not aware of that prior to the stories coming out?  And that seems like an important -- given the attention that this has gotten, it seems like an important thing that maybe you could ask him the next time you see him, because you’ve gotten this question a number of times, including two days ago.
MR. EARNEST:  The President obviously has a lot of things on his plate, and I’m not sure that sort of the details of an individual administration -- senior administration official’s email arrangement sort of lands on the President’s desk with any regularity.  But we certainly do have the expectation that everybody who has served the administration, even at the highest levels, is in compliance with the Federal Records Act and at the White House with the Presidential Records Act.
And again, based on what Senator Clinton’s team has said about what they have done, they are in compliance with the Federal Records Act. 
Q    And then secondly, can you give us the President’s reaction to learning about this, particularly given his commitment to being the most transparent administration in history?
MR. EARNEST:  Again, I don’t have a specific reaction to relay to you.  The President does have the expectation that everybody in his administration takes the steps that are necessary to be in compliance with the Federal Records Act and with the Presidential Records Act.  And again, that means using, as often as possible, using your official government email when you’re conducting official government business.  It also means that when you’re in a situation where a personal email has been used for government business, that that personal email is properly forward to agency officials so it can be maintained and preserved and used to respond to legitimate requests from the public and from Congress. 
And again, based on the steps that Secretary Clinton’s team has taken, it seems that she is -- or it is clear that she is in compliance with the Federal Records Act.
Q    Okay, so one more on this.  It seems like, based on some of your responses to the questions that you’ve gotten this week on this, that you’re not interested or the White House is not interested in saying specifically or finding out for even yourselves who knew what when, in terms of someone as senior as the Secretary of State having this kind of an email arrangement.  Is that a fair assessment of your guys’ view on this, given your responses so far?
MR. EARNEST:  As I think I’ve said on a few occasions, and I think as is evidenced by the fact that I have done my best to provide an understanding of our approach to this situation that the President and his administration does take seriously a commitment to transparency and a commitment to compliance with both the Federal Records Act and with the Presidential Records Act. 
But again, as we’ve said, it is the responsibility of individual agencies both to set up an email system that is used by agency employees.  It’s the responsibility of agency officials to ensure that the way that they maintain and store records is consistent with the requirements of the Federal Records Act.  That's not just true of the State Department, that's true of every agency.  And we certainly would expect that they’ll continue to do that.
Over the course of the last few years, the President has taken steps to give agencies clearer and greater guidance, more specific guidance about how to ensure that they are following those rules properly.  The President even signed into law legislation at the end of last year that offered even clearer guidance about how to ensure proper compliance with the Federal Records Act and proper coordination with the National Archives and Records Administration.  And we're going to continue to hold everybody in the administration to a high standard for that level of compliance.
Q    Did the Secretary talk to anyone, including the President, about this in the past few days?  Anyone in the White House?
MR. EARNEST:  Well, I don't have any specific conversations to read out.  I don't know of any conversations between the President and Secretary Clinton.
Q    Has the Secretary spoken to anyone in the White House about this in the few days, she herself?  And has she offered any explanation as to what happened?
MR. EARNEST:  I don't know the answer to that.
Q    Let me ask you about the trip today.  You said he’s going to talk about the importance of young people in movements, and then you've got the trip tomorrow to Selma about the civil rights anniversary.  Does the President look at this trip to the college today as sort of a call to action to young people?  Is that what he plans to do?
MR. EARNEST:  I think throughout his career in public service, the President has noted how important of a role young people have played in shaping this country.  And that is true throughout our nation’s history.  It’s probably never been more true than at the historic events in Selma 50 years ago this week. 
And there is a role to play for young people to shape this country and its future.  And that was true 50 years ago, and it’s just as true today.  The President certainly did inspire a lot of young people to become engaged in the political process over the course of his presidential campaign.  But that says a whole lot more about the young people in this country than it does about the President.
And it certainly -- as we talk about all of the challenges that are facing this country, whether it is striving for greater equality for our citizens, or trying to take the difficult steps that are necessary to combat the causes of climate change, or even to shape an economy in this country that reflects our commitment to the middle class, and having an economy that grows from the middle out, that there is a role for young people to play in shaping that kind of future for our country.  It’s only going to be possible, though, if we see young people take the steps not just to be committed to their country, but also be committed to preparing and equipping themselves by getting a good education, by getting the kinds of training that's necessary to succeed in this economy.
So the President is going to talk about how those kinds of issues are interrelated.  And the President will make some comments at the top of this event, but he’s also looking forward to taking questions from some of the young people in the audience.  Many of the young people who will be participating in the event today are young people who have demonstrated some engagement in their community -- whether it’s working in nonprofits, or even being politically active.  The President wants to nurture and encourage that kind of involvement in their community.  And the President wants to hear from them about the issues that they think are most important to sort of cultivate their continued involvement and engagement in shaping the future of this country.
Q    One more thing on Clinton.  Is the White House or anyone in the administration concerned that it was Clinton aides who decided what emails to hand over to the State Department for this thorough vetting?
MR. EARNEST:  Well, the responsibility is for individual members of the administration, if they’ve used personal email, to ensure that that email has been sent to agency officials so it can be properly preserved and maintained.  Those are the rules, and those are the rules that Secretary Clinton and her team are following.
I haven’t -- the fact that -- I think there are couple of relevant facts.  The first is a large number of the emails that they have sent over to the State Department were emails that were already maintained on the State Department system because the Secretary was emailing with State Department employees at their State.gov email addresses.
So that is why I think that so many of these -- so that's one thing.  The second thing is that many of the -- that I know that there were hundreds of emails that Secretary Clinton’s team sent to the State Department that have already been turned over to Congress in response to a request from Congress for certain documentation.  And that is an indication that Secretary Clinton and her team took seriously their responsibility to comply with the Federal Records Act by sending email related to her official government business that exists on her personal email system.
So there’s plenty of data to indicate that they took seriously this responsibility, and they should because the President takes seriously this responsibility and has asked everybody who serves in the administration to take seriously their responsibility to be in compliance with the Federal Records Act.
Q    Josh, for six years they weren’t taking that responsibility seriously.  So is there any concern that maybe this voluntary, individual responsibility should be changed to something more stringent to make sure that people are complying?
MR. EARNEST:  Well, the first thing I’ll say is that there has been greater, more specific guidance that has been provided to agency officials -- and this has been clarified in the law -- about how to ensure the use of private email, when it occurs in the course of government business, can be properly maintained and preserved. 
So there has been clear guidance that has been given to agency employees since 2009.  And again, the basic responsibility is ensuring that the use of personal email is -- or in those situations where personal email was used, that it’s properly maintained and preserved at the agency in coordination with the efforts of the National Archives and Records Administration. 
And again, in this situation it’s apparent that that's exactly what’s occurred.
Q    Josh, aside from compliance with the Federal Records Act, given that the President has wanted this administration to be the most transparent in history, aside from compliance with the letter of the law, does this practice using personal email meet the President’s standards for transparency for this administration? 
MR. EARNEST:  Again, I guess one thing that goes above and beyond the Federal Records Act is the request that Secretary Clinton has made to publicize all of her email to the greatest extent possible.  So I would say at least that one specific step would be consistent with the President’s aspiration to ensure that his government is much more compliant.
Q    -- using personal e-mail in the first place?
MR. EARNEST:  Right.  Again, well, that’s why the specific guidance that the administration has given to agency employees or administration employees is that they should use their official email address when they’re conducting official government business. 
In those situations where personal email is involved in the conduct of official government business, it's important for that email to be forwarded to the agency so that it can be properly preserved and maintained.  And again, since 2009, more specific guidelines has been given to the agencies about how exactly to do that.
Q    Can I ask you about the Iraqi offensive on Tikrit?  I believe General Dempsey has been quoted as saying that if no ethnic cleansing happens, if there’s no sort of Shia-Sunni sectarian-motivated fighting, that this Iranian-supported offensive by the Iraqi army is not a bad thing.  What’s the current White House thinking on this?  Would you say that Iran’s involvement at this point is something you’re okay with, is it something you’d welcome?  Are you watching closely what unfolds there?  And if so, how are you monitoring that given that Iran is involved in this and not the United States?
Q    Well, I’d say a couple things about that.  The real priority that we have placed in all of our interactions with the Iraqi government -- and this goes back to the Iraqi government when it was led by Mr. Abadi’s predecessor -- is ensuring that Iraq’s political leaders are taking the necessary steps to unite that country to face the threat that they’ve posed by ISIL. 
And that’s true not just in their governing philosophy and in their government actions, but it also needs to be true as they undertake security operations.  And in this case, we have a multi-sectarian force that is being led by Iraqi security forces against ISIL forces in Tikrit. 
We have seen that it doesn’t just involve Iraqi security forces, it does include Shia militia; it also includes Sunni tribal fighters from that area.  It is not at all insignificant that we have seen Sunni leaders in the Iraqi government step up and articulate their support for this specific operation.  That includes one of the Vice Presidents in Iraq, it includes the Minister of Defense, it includes the Speaker of the House.  These are all prominent Sunni elected leaders in Iraq who are indicating their strong support for this mission.
And as we have said, it's important that as this mission is undertaken, that it is not used as cover to exact sectarian retribution or revenge, and that priority has not changed just because it's apparent that some elements of the Iranian military are involved.
Q    But how do you then -- doesn’t that exacerbate the nerves among allies in the region, and Israel as well, that the nuclear talks with Iran are somehow just a gateway into this broader softening of relations?  So what are you guys saying to them?
MR. EARNEST:  Look, we have been clear that the United States will not coordinate militarily with the Iranians.  And we have also been clear throughout our talks with the international community and Iran about their nuclear program that the successful completion of those diplomatic conversations doesn’t come anywhere close to resolving our long list of concerns about Iran’s behavior.  And whether it's their support for terrorism, their destabilizing activities in the region, their repeated threats against Israel and their expressions of anti-Semitism, and even their continuing detention -- unjust detention -- of American citizens, are just some of the things on our long list of concerns with Iran.
    The strategic decision that the President has made is that trying to resolve our concerns with Iran’s nuclear program only makes it easier for us to try to resolve those other concerns,  and that failing to resolve the concerns about Iran’s nuclear program only exacerbates those other concerns we have with Iran’s behavior.  So that’s why we have moved aggressively in a diplomatic setting with our international partners to try to resolve our concerns with Iran’s nuclear program. 
But we’re going to continue to have those other concerns.  And I think a similar dynamic could be articulated as it relates to Iran’s involvement in this specific operation, which is that it doesn’t change our clear refusal to coordinate with them militarily, it doesn’t ease any of the other concerns that we’ve expressed with Iran’s behavior in the region, and it does not any way absolve Iraq and those who are participating in this mission of their responsibility to ensure that this operation doesn’t devolve into an opportunity to exact sectarian revenge.
Q    Can you talk about preparations for the Selma speech tomorrow?  Is the President actually writing this speech himself?  And what are some of the themes he really wants to get across at this historic time?
MR. EARNEST:  The President is working on his speech; he spent some time during the snow day yesterday working on it.  You’ll hear a little bit more from the President today I think in terms of his thinking about the message that he wants to deliver in Selma. 
I think suffice it to say, what occurred in Selma 50 years ago is a seminal event in American history, and it does reflect one of things that’s so powerful about this country and about our ability to try to make our union more perfect.  And the President will talk about this a little bit more today and certainly tomorrow in terms that are much more eloquent than what I’ve just said.
Q    Josh, on that, there are a lot of people who say that the Voting Rights Act that passed 50 years ago has been gutted by the Supreme Court and there’s been retrogression that’s moving backwards instead of moving forward.  Does the President hope to use this speech in Selma to move Congress to actually take action to restore some of the things that have been lost?
MR. EARNEST:  Well, I think the President mentioned this a little bit in his radio interviews -- that there’s no denying that we’ve made tremendous progress in the last 50 years.  It may be a little bit of a cliché to suggest that we have more work to do, but it's true that we have more work to do.  But I don’t think there’s any doubt that we’ve made tremendous progress in this country even when it comes to voting rights. 
But for the additional work that needs to get done, it's going to be the responsibility of the people of this country to mobilize and to make clear to our political leaders that there are additional changes that can be made to protect the right of every eligible American to cast a vote.  That’s a lot of the history that was made in Selma 50 years ago.  But there’s more history to be made on this.
Q    Is he going to call for specific legislation in reaction to the Supreme Court decision on the Voting Rights Act?
MR. EARNEST:  The President doesn’t view his speech in Selma as an opportunity to lay out additional policy proposals or to make specific prescriptions about the legislative process.  This will be an opportunity for the President to look back on the events of 50 years ago, talk about how it shapes the identity of this country and how it should inspire the next generation of Americans to engage at the community level to bring about the kind of change they want to see in their country.
Q    And lastly, on South Carolina, it's not very far away -- why has it taken so long for the President to get back here?
MR. EARNEST:  I don't know the specific answer to that question.  I'll say that the President does have very fond memories of being here in 2008 and campaigning all across this state.  And as I mentioned at the top, without the dramatic showing that we saw on Election Night -- January 26, 2008 -- in South Carolina, there would be no President Barack Obama. 
And the President is looking forward to seeing some of the people who were involved in that campaign a little over seven years ago, and certainly will be -- the memories of those couple of weeks will be fresh in his mind as we spend a little time in Columbia today.
Q    Josh, after the attack against the U.S. Ambassador to South Korea, is the White House thinking about tightening any security for U.S. ambassadors abroad?  And how broadly have the recommendations after the Benghazi consulate attack been applied? And should that have applied here?
MR. EARNEST:  Let me first start by saying that our thoughts and prayers continue to be with Ambassador Lippert and his family over in South Korea.  Many of us had the opportunity to work with him, again, not just on the campaign but also at the White House.  And so it is clear that the events of a couple of days ago were, to put it bluntly, pretty scary.
But we are pleased to see that Ambassador Lippert is getting the medical attention that he needs.  He seems to be in good spirits.  If you follow his Twitter feed, you know that he’s in great spirits.  But we're going to continue to think about him as he continues to recover from this attack.  He’s only been in South Korea for a few months, but he’s done an extraordinary job of representing the United States and our interests in that country.  And we're looking forward to his extraordinary service continuing over there.
As it relates to the security precautions in place around him, I know that this is something that the State Department is looking at and it's something they take seriously.  And it's because, frankly, the President has made clear to the State Department that the safety and security of our diplomatic officers around the globe is something the President considers to be a very high priority.  And so I know that this is something that the State Department will take very seriously.  I know that they’ve already been in touch with officials in South Korea who also take seriously their responsibility to ensure that American diplomats are safe.
And so we look forward to working together with the Koreans to ensure that the proper precautions are in place to ensure that Ambassador Lippert, his family, and other U.S. officials who work at the U.S. embassy in Seoul are safe as well.
Q    Has the President spoken to the Ambassador?  I know they’re close.
MR. EARNEST:  The President did have the opportunity to telephone Ambassador Lippert on Wednesday evening here in the U.S.  And the President thanked him for his tremendous service so far and told him that he hoped that Ambassador Lippert would heal quickly and be back up on his feet soon.  And Ambassador Lippert expressed a firm commitment to do exactly that.
Q    But is he concerned, though, that security is not up to par if a knife-wielding attacker is able to get to him?
MR. EARNEST:  Any time there’s an incident like this, it does raise concerns.  But there’s no doubt that the State Department takes this very seriously, and we have confidence that they’re going to take the steps that are necessary to ensure that Ambassador Lippert can do his job of representing the United States as safely as possible.
Q    What about all U.S. ambassadors abroad?  Does this go that wide, the State Department review, or is it specifically focused on South Korea?
MR. EARNEST:  I don't want to leave you with the impression that there’s a specific agency-wide review underway.  I just want to leave you with the impression that any time that an incident like this occurs people take a look at what’s been happening to make sure that it doesn’t happen again.  But I don't know of any sort of formal review that's underway other than making sure that the necessary coordination is in place between the State Department and officials in Korea to ensure Ambassador Lippert’s security.
Q    We're going to a Historical Black College and University.  Some people have been critical about the administration not expanding Pell grants.  Why does the administration not want to expand Pell grants, or use some of the money for community colleges to expand Pell grants?
MR. EARNEST:  Well, I will say that one of the reasons we're going to Benedict College is because it is a Historically Black College and University that has succeeded in making sure their students are getting a good education.  And I know that many of the students at Benedict College benefit from the Pell Grant program.  And the President does believe firmly that we need to open up the door to a college education to every middle-class family and every family that's trying to get into the middle class.  And that's simply because a college education has never been more important to getting a good-paying middle-class job.  And the President will be talking about that when he’s at Benedict College today.
Q    Any lawmakers on the plane?
MR. EARNEST:  I don't know of any lawmakers on the plane.  I saw that the Attorney General is on the plane with us today, and a number of senior White House officials, as well.
All right.  See you on the ground.
END

	11:45 A.M. EST
The White House
Office of the Press Secretary
Aboard Air Force One

	En Route Chicago, Illinois 
12:35 P.M. EST
MR. SCHULTZ:  My name is Eric Schultz.  Welcome aboard Air Force One on our trip to Chicago.  To lead us off, I brought with us with us Christy Goldfuss, who is a senior advisor at the Council on Environmental Quality, to discuss what we're up to today and the announcements that we're making today.  So I will let her lead us off if you have any questions for her, and then I'm happy to take up anything else you have.
MS. GOLDFUSS:  Hi, everybody.  Just to introduce myself again, my name is Christy Goldfuss.  I'm a senior advisor at the Council on Environmental Quality.  Let me just say up front, I've only been on the job three weeks, and this is my first time in front of all of you, so this is a big day for us -- and take it easy on me.
Today, the President is launching an initiative called “Every Kid in a Park,” that will give every fourth-grade student and their families a free pass to national parks and other federal lands and waters for a full year, starting next September.
This initiative is a part of President Obama’s commitment to make sure that all Americans, and especially kids, have the chance to explore the extraordinary outdoor resources and historic treasures that belong to all of them. 
The National Park Service will celebrate its centennial in 2016, which gives us the opportunity to think about what we would like to see in the next century.  The focus will be on helping all Americans find the park that speaks to them, whether it's urban, rural, cultural or historic.  But the administration will focus our resources on kids.
We know today more than 80 percent of American families live in urban areas and many lack easy access to safe outdoor spaces.  At the same time, kids are spending more time than ever in front of screens.  A 2010 Kaiser Family Foundation study found that young people now devote an average of more than seven hours a day to electronic media use, or about 53 hours a week.
To remove financial barriers to get kids outdoors, the “Every Kid in a Park” pass will allow the people who take children to public lands and waters -- their families, guardians, community groups, or teachers -- to visit these places for free as well.  And because we know that a big reason many children don’t go to these places is because they can’t get there easily, this initiative will also help schools and families arrange visits by providing trip-planning tools and helping to cover transportation costs for schools with the greatest financial need.
Let me just take a moment to talk about why fourth grade.  So the National Park Service and the other federal land management agencies worked with the Department of Education and other advisors to explore what the right age range was.  There’s a lot of research showing that if you reach kids before the time they turn 11, you have a better chance of building a lasting relationship.  In addition, a lot of the land management agencies already have existing programming in this place so they don’t have to build something new.
And lastly, this is about building a lasting relationship with educators.  So we want to make sure that we really make the connection with fourth-grade teachers so we can build a bond that lasts beyond just the centennial, and works into the future so that we’re continually working with these fourth-grade educators and fourth-grade students.
In addition to announcing this exciting initiative, the President today will discuss his designation of three new national monuments.  As you know, he’s on his way to Chicago to create Pullman National Monument.  This will be Chicago’s first national park system unit, so it’s not surprising that many of the kids he will be addressing today have most likely never been to a national park.
With the designation, not only will they have the opportunity in their backyard to learn from the successes and struggles of the past, but they will benefit from the economic support that comes from sharing these stories with the entire world. 
The Pullman site is one of America’s first factory towns and is iconic for its history of labor unrest, and the legacy of civil rights advances fueled by the Pullman porters.  When the Pullman company lowered its workers’ wages in 1894, but not the rent it charged for company housing, it prompted a strike with nationwide ramifications, including the creation of Labor Day. 
The Pullman company also recruited from the population of former slaves to serve on these luxury cars.  These service jobs held prestige in the African America community, and played a major role in the rise of the African American middle class, and ultimately the development of the Civil Rights Movement of the 20th century.
And lastly, just on Pullman -- talk about finding your own park -- this is just blocks away from where President Obama started his career as a community organizer years ago.  The President will also discuss his designation of Browns Canyon National Monument in Colorado -- a cultural site of extraordinary beauty with world-class recreational opportunities that attract visitors from around the globe.
And noting that today is a day of remembrance for the Japanese American internment, he will announce that he will create Honouliuli National Monument in Hawaii, the site of an internment camp where Japanese-American citizens, resident immigrants and prisoners of war were held captive during World War II.  All of these monuments have broad and longstanding community support.
So let me close by saying -- by announcing “Every Kid in a Park” initiative at the same time he is committing to sharing the riches of one of America’s best ideas with children across the country, he is making it possible for each and every one of them to find a story that relates to them so that they, too, can find their park. 
And with that, I’m happy to answer any questions.
Q    So the costs -- do you know what the estimated cost is for this?
MS. GOLDFUSS:  So unfortunately, the Park Service and the other federal land management agencies have looked at the numbers, and we can’t take into account the increase in visitation around the centennial and inviting all Americans.  So they have some estimates but believe that the overall increase in visitation will make up for those losses, and that the community benefit around each of these federal lands in terms of economic value of going to restaurants and going to hotels will make up for that as well.
Q    Do you think it’s going to be a net-zero?  That there will be no --
MS. GOLDFUSS:  That’s what we’re hoping, yes.
Q    Can you talk about Rahm? 
MR. SCHULTZ:  Yes.  Anything else for Christy so she doesn’t have to bear witness to this? 
MS. GOLDFUSS:  Really?  That would be so much fun.  All right.  Good, thank you, guys. 
Q    Thank you very much.  Do we have to prompt you any more than that?
MR. SCHULTZ:  Do you have a question?
Q    I do.  As you know, Eric, ahead of the Israeli Prime Minister’s visit, the White House said that he wouldn’t be meeting with Netanyahu because of a policy against appearing with elected officials so close to their reelection.  I was wondering if that policy applies to Democratic mayors from major U.S. cities.
Q    He was an Israeli citizen at one point. 
MR. SCHULTZ:  It is a very good question, Josh.  As you know, that is not a principle that generally applies to our domestic politics.  Obviously, the Mayor is someone who has served as the President’s Chief of Staff.  They have been friends for many years, remain in very close touch.  And as mayor of a city that the President cares deeply about, the President has supported the Mayor’s elections in the past, campaigns in the past, and he supports this one as well.
Q    He did some radio spots and robo-calls, is that right?
MR. SCHULTZ:  So I don’t have the full list of what he’s done, but we can try and pull that for you.
Q    And is this basically a campaign stop for Rahm?
MR. SCHULTZ:  Well, today’s stop, as you know, designating this area, is one that’s been in the works for a while.  It’s part of about 16 different implementations of the Antiquities Act that the President has done in recent months.
And so this is a designation that, I think as you’re suggesting, the Mayor has supported, but it’s also had widespread support throughout the community.  Republicans and Democrats -- I know the Republican governor there has been advocating for this, as well as Senator Mark Kirk, both of whom I think are joining us today.  So I actually don’t think the designation today is a partisan issue at all.
Q    As you know, Eric, this is a site of particular significance to the African American community in Chicago, and Mayor Emanuel has really been counting on a lot of support from African American voters, particularly if he wants to avoid a runoff.  Is the President hoping that his visit today will help encourage African American voters to turn out for the Mayor’s reelection?
MR. SCHULTZ:  Josh, you are right that this center has a long and iconic history, a very rich history, which Christy mentioned and the President will discuss at length shortly. 
The President’s designation of this area is, again, one that’s been on our radar for a very long time.  There’s been legislation to this effect.  It’s something that, again, both Democrats and Republicans have supported on the ground in Chicago and throughout Illinois.  The President’s support for the Mayor’s campaign is, again, something that -- he believes he’s been a very strong mayor for the city.
Q    You have to say the timing does look a lot like a campaign stop.  It’s only days before the election.
MR. SCHULTZ:  I would tell you that with today’s announcements of the three that Christy mentioned, we are now up to 16 established national monuments in the past few months.  So I don’t think this announcement or the timing is out of the ordinary.  This builds on what we’ve done with the San Gabriel Mountains -- some of you joined us on that trip in California -- and our move to protect the Arctic National Wildlife Refuge and Bristol Bay in Alaska.
Q    What is Obama doing to help support Rahm -- maybe possibly going into Tuesday?  And can you tell us whether or not Emanuel asked for Obama to come, or whether Obama offered his support to come to Chicago on this day?
MR. SCHULTZ:  Julia, I don’t have the full rundown, as I mentioned to Mike, of all that the President has done to support the Mayor.  I'm happy to see if we can pull that for you.
In terms of how this visit came about, again, this is something that the President -- I think as you all have noticed -- has been doing a lot of lately.  Today’s designations are the latest of 16 that we’ve done around the country.  Again, including the San Gabriel Mountains in California, the Arctic National Wildlife Refuge in Alaska, two other announcements out of Colorado and Hawaii today.  So this is not something out of the ordinary for us.
Q    Moving away from Rahm -- I can always come back.   Germany has denied Greece’s request for a six-month extension on its loan from the Eurozone.  Has Obama weighed in on that at all?  Has he been in touch with European partners?  And does he still believe that Greece should be allowed to loosen its austerity measures?
MR. SCHULTZ:  Julia, I don’t have any presidential calls to read out, but I think you all are aware that Treasury Secretary Lew spoke with his counterpart yesterday on this, and they discussed the latest deliberations between Greece and its international partners. 
Secretary Lew noted that the failure to reach an agreement would lead to immediate hardships in Greece, and that that uncertainty is not good for Europe, and that time is of the essence.  As you know, our general approach to this is that Greece, the EU, the European Central Bank and the IMF are engaged in very difficult but important negotiations on how to chart a path forward.  It builds on the crucial structural reforms that Greece wants to sustain so that we can get back to long-term growth.
Q    Does the White House have any thoughts about Walmart’s decision to increase wages for its workers, and also to change the way that they do some of their scheduling for workers?
MR. SCHULTZ:  I'm incredibly glad you asked that, Josh.  As I think you clearly saw this morning, Walmart announced that it would be raising wages for its associates.  Today’s announcement is another example of businesses along with cities and states taking action on their own to raise wages for their workers, recognizing that doing so can raise productivity, reduce turnover and improve morale. 
I think we’re now up to 17 states, the District of Columbia, and obviously corporations large and small that have taken action since 2013 when the President called for this in his State of the Union.  We continue to call on Congress to give all workers in America a wage -- a raise hike.  But given their recalcitrance on this, because Republicans keep blocking it, we’re going to continue to make progress in other ways.
Q    Any thoughts on Ukraine and the situation in Ukraine at the moment?  It seems to be getting worse.
MR. SCHULTZ:  Thank you, Mike.  We are definitely deeply troubled by reports of the Ukrainian military and civilian casualties as a result of the Russian-backed separatist assault.  This violence has continued, despite Russian and separatist commitments to a ceasefire, reaffirmed in last week’s Minsk Implementation Plan.  And we call on all parties, including Russia, to abide by that plan.  What was agreed to last week was not a shopping list.  You don’t get to decide which items you’re going to abide by.  Those were commitments made by all parties, and we expect them to keep their word.
Q    Has President Obama seen the report that Rudy Giuliani said that he doesn’t love America?  And if so, did he have any reaction to it?
MR. SCHULTZ:  Mr. Giuliani test-drove this line of attack during his fleeting 2007 run for the presidency.  I was obviously not at the dinner last night, nor did I watch the remarks, so I'm going to leave it to those at the dinner to assess whether or not they were appropriate. 
He seems embarrassed enough to be doing damage control this morning, so I'm not going to pile on from here.  But I will say I agree with him on one thing he said today, which is that it was a horrible thing to say. 
Q    Vice President Biden announced plans to travel next week to New Hampshire, following visits this past week to Iowa and to South Carolina.  Is he on an early state primary tour?  Should we expect Florida down the line?
MR. SCHULTZ:  Nice try, Josh.  I think the Vice President announced his travels, and that office will have more on what they’re doing in New Hampshire, in the Granite State. 
Anything else?  Thank you, guys.
END  

	12:49 P.M. EST
The White House
Office of the Press Secretary
Aboard Air Force One

	En Route Indianapolis, Indiana 
12:58 P.M. EST
MR. SCHULTZ:  Good afternoon, everyone.  Welcome aboard Air Force One.  Thank you for joining us as we head to Ivy Tech Community College where the President will discuss the importance of middle-class economics, specifically making the paychecks of working families go further, preparing hardworking Americans to earn higher wages, and keeping good high-paying jobs here in America.
The President will also be joined today by a bipartisan group of elected officials, including former Senator Dick Lugar, who is on the plane with us this afternoon; Senator Joe Donnelly; Congressman André Carson; and Indianapolis Mayor Greg Ballard, who will actually introduce the President.
I also want to draw your attention to Ivy Tech’s renowned apprenticeship program, an initiative that serves as a model of how technical and community colleges can successfully coordinate to help students advance towards an industry-recognized credential.  To date, more than 9,000 apprentices have been awarded college degrees through Ivy Tech’s program, and apprentices have an average starting wage of north of $50,000.
And as you all know, just last week, the President unveiled efforts to align more than $50 billion in education and workforce investments to support more programs that link apprenticeships, on-the-job learning, and the chance to earn college credit.
So, with that, I will take your questions.
Q    What can you say about the Islamic State’s claim that an American hostage that has been held there has been killed?
MR. SCHULTZ:  Nedra, I saw those reports.  We're obviously deeply concerned by those reports.  We have not at this time seen any indication to corroborate those claims, but that's all we have right now.
Q    Do you have any information that she was in the area where this bombing campaign was going on?
MR. SCHULTZ:  Again, I know these reports are a few minutes old, so I can assure you that our intelligence community is looking into them.
Q    Can you say in general what the United States does when we conduct our airstrikes to ensure that American hostages or other hostages being held by the Islamic State are not in the vicinity?
MR. SCHULTZ:  I can tell you that, as with all of our coalition partners, the United States supports and coordinates with the Royal Jordanian Air Force as they continue to fly over Syria.  I'd refer you to the Department of Defense on how that works, but we do coordinate.
Q    Eric, can I ask you how closely has the U.S. tracked this woman’s location while she’s been in custody or has been a hostage of ISIS?  Does the U.S. know where she is, generally?
MR. SCHULTZ:  Kevin, I appreciate the question, but I don't have an intelligence assessment to read out to you at this time. I can tell you that, of course, the United States of America spares no effort to secure the safe release of any American held overseas.  That includes exhausting military options, intelligence resources, diplomatic channels, obviously the financial stranglehold we put on ISIL.  So I can speak generally to that, but that’s about it.
Q    So, Eric, what’s the intelligence community doing now to verify this?  Do we have the CIA investigating this?  What are you doing to confirm or disprove these reports?
MR. SCHULTZ:  Again, I don't have anything further to tell you about this.  Obviously we are deeply concerned, and as soon as we have anything additional we'll be in touch.
Q    On another topic, the Benghazi Select Committee has said they intend to interview several current and former administration officials, including several presidential aides.  How are you responding to that?
MR. SCHULTZ:  I saw that press release, Nedra.  I will say that, as you know, we've cooperated with all legitimate oversight requests heretofore on Benghazi, and that’s actually been a two-year journey with Congress.  And every time I turn around, there’s another committee in Congress issuing a report exonerating us from any of the conspiracy theories Republicans have proffered over the past two years. 
But as you know, we’ve participated in 22 congressional hearings, over 125 member and staff briefings, and dozens of witness interviews.  All told, again, I believe that several of the committees have issued reports giving us a clean bill of health on this issue.
Q    So at this point, have you determined whether or not you’ll make those officials available?
MR. SCHULTZ:  I haven't even seen the request.  We’ve only seen a press release on this.
Q    Can you talk about yesterday -- the President got some criticism for his comments at the prayer breakfast.  Was he surprised by that?  And what is your response to that?
MR. SCHULTZ:  I saw that commentary, Anita.  I think that the President has spoken many times to his belief in American exceptionalism.  And the President believes America is the greatest country on Earth not only because of our military might or economic prowess, or because we serve in a unique leadership role amongst the international community, but part and parcel to America’s standing in the world is our values, and those are values like equality, tolerance, fairness, civil rights, human rights, treating every human being with respect and decency -- no matter their gender, their race, their faith, their sexual identity.  Part and parcel to that and our values are holding ourselves up to our own values and our own standards. 
So the President believes that when we fall short of that, we need to be honest with ourselves and look inward, and hold ourselves accountable.  That’s what gives us the moral standing around the world -- not just because we assert it, but because we hold ourselves accountable.  So whether that’s our elected officials, whether that is a free and vibrant press, a judiciary system that’s independent -- those are the values the President was talking about.
Q    Did he think he would have that kind of criticism?  Was he surprised by that?
MR. SCHULTZ:  Fair question.  I have not spoken with him about the reaction to the remarks, but I know that there’s a failed presidential candidate, an RNC chairman from the past who have criticized us.  But I don’t have a response to either of those two people.
Q    He’s also being criticized by some Republicans, like Rob Portman, who’s not one of these conservative pundits.  He’s a Republican senator who said that he’s troubled by the idea that the President was drawing some sort of moral equivalency between what ISIS does and things done in the name of Christianity.  Was he trying to draw a comparison and a sense of equivalency between those two things?  Or does he reject that characterization?
MR. SCHULTZ:  Again, what I think the President was trying to say is, over the course of human history there are times where extremists pervert their own religion to justify violence.  And that’s what the President was trying to talk about yesterday.
Q    How did President choose the national prayer breakfast to make those points? 
MR. SCHULTZ:  Again, I think if you look at the entire text of the remarks, you’ll see how well suited they were for that audience and that setting.  And again, I think the President -- I’d refer you to his speech earlier this year at the United Nations General Assembly, where he spoke very compellingly about the United States’ standing in the world and how part and parcel to that standing is us living up to our own values and our own principles.
Q    Can I ask about the event today, actually?  He’s talking about I guess things that came up in the State of the Union and the budget, but it’s the first travel since the budget.  There’s a couple members of Congress -- you said a few that are around -- but has he talked to leadership in the last week about his budget rollout and what he wants?  Has he talked to any congressional leaders?
MR. SCHULTZ:  I don’t have specific conversations to read out to you at this time.  But I can tell you that we are absolutely in touch with House members, Senate members and their staffs of both parties, working through the President’s priorities and what he laid out in the budget, and a lot of the proposals, like today’s, on making the first two years of community college free for all Americans, working through those to achieve -- make that a reality.
Q    Has the President garnered any bipartisan support for the community college proposal?  When he announced it, he talked about Senator Alexander being from a state that does a similar thing.  But to date, I'm not aware of any Republicans who have signed on, or even said anything good about his approach to doing this.  Has there been progress behind the scenes?
MR. SCHULTZ:  I'm so glad you asked, Julie.  I went back on the calendar and I looked that we announced this proposals 27 days ago.  So I don’t have -- I'm not surprised that Congress hasn’t passed this yet, because it is a significant proposal.  And as you point out, it is an idea that has engendered bipartisan support.  This was a program that was started under a Republican governor in Tennessee, adapted by a Democratic mayor in Illinois, and now you’ve got a Democratic President talking about it in Washington.
So while this is not law yet, we believe the conversation just started, and we’re looking forward to lifting up those ideas today in Indianapolis. 
Q    On the conversation on the AUMF with Congress -- what’s the timetable for sending up language?  And can you quantify at all for us the behind-the-scenes sort of conversations and consultations that have gone on about what that resolution should say?
MR. SCHULTZ:  I believe my colleague, Josh Earnest, has put the timetable at “relatively soon.”  I'm going to stick with that. 
Q    But he didn’t rule out today.  Can you now rule out --
MR. SCHULTZ:  I can rule out today, yes.  I can tell you that consultations have been robust; that right after the New Year break, the President sat down with leadership.  This was a topic that came up in the discussion.  And it was clear that leaders on the Hill wanted to do this -- wanted to get this done.  It was also clear that this is a priority for the President and that they wanted language from the White House.  They also wanted to be consulted in advance of sending that language up.  So that’s what we’ve been doing -- robust, intensive, discussions, bicameral and bipartisan.
Q    Who’s been involved in those discussions?  Do you have senior administration officials on the Hill talking to people about this?  Cabinet members, the National Security Advisor?
MR. SCHULTZ:  We have a whole team that’s working on this.  That includes folks from our White House Counsel’s Office, our national security team, our legislative team, and maybe even a communications person or two.
Q    I’ve got some labor questions for you, Josh -- or, excuse me, Eric.  I’m sorry. 
MR. SCHULTZ:  I’ll take it as a compliment.
Q    First of all, when looking at the West Coast ports, there’s a potential of a shutdown of those ports in the next seven to five days.  And we’re interested in knowing if the White House would be willing to do anything along the lines of what Bush did and employ Taft-Hartley to force those negotiations to go forward and for the workers to go back to work.
MR. SCHULTZ:  Yes, Annie, I appreciate the question.  And I can assure you that officials at the White House and across the relative agencies are closely monitoring the situation.  Right now, our belief is that both sides should be resolving this at the negotiating table.
Q    Is Taft-Hartley something that’s off the table for you, or is it something that you’d consider?
MR. SCHULTZ:  I think it’s just a premature question, because we believe both sides ought to resolve this at the negotiating table.
Q    Do you have any sense that they’re about to come to some sort of resolution?  I mean, you’re talking about $2 billion a day in loss.
MR. SCHULTZ:  We believe this ought to be resolved at the negotiating table.  We believe they’re working expeditiously to do so, and that’s how it should be resolved.
Q    On another labor question, or similar lines -- U.S. oil workers have -- negotiations have broken down with U.S. oil workers in nine plants, which could potentially have a terrible effect.  I’m curious if the White House has been involved at all in helping those negotiations?
MR. SCHULTZ:  I don't have any specific pieces of involvement to read out to you at this time.  I can tell you this is another situation that we are monitoring, and it’s yet another situation that should be resolved at the negotiating table through the sort of collective bargaining that has been known to help be an instrument to resolve these in the past.
Q    But there’s not a federal monitor in that case -- mediator in that case.  Is that right?
MR. SCHULTZ:  I believe that’s correct.  I just meant in the colloquial term that we are monitoring it.
Q    Okay.  Just one other question.  On the Department of Energy -- the Department of Energy pulled a $1 billion commitment for a clean oil plant in Illinois.  And this is a project that had been sort of a marquee clean oil project for quite some time.  And I’m just curious, like, why was the administration’s mind changed on this particular project?
MR. SCHULTZ:  Yes, I’d refer you to the Department of Energy for details on their decision to close out the federal support for the project.  I think it was becoming clear to them that it wasn’t going to be able to meet the budgetary deadlines to use funding that Congress had set aside for it.
Q    Is it any sort of retreat from the clean coal efforts that the administration has backed?
MR. SCHULTZ:  Absolutely not.  As you know, the administration has shown unprecedented support for clean coal technologies.  And I’d refer you to our budget released this week that includes a new proposal for tax incentives to support clean coal.
Q    On arming Ukrainian rebels, there seems to be growing political pressure for this.  And yesterday, Josh seemed to open more of a door by talking about a level of bloodshed that may call for arming them.  Where does the White House stand with this decision?  Are they holding off until the President can speak with Chancellor Merkel?
MR. SCHULTZ:  Julie, I know your question was premised on rising political forces, but I just want to be clear that a decision like this made by the President would only be made by what’s in the best interest of the national security of the United States. 
I don't have an update for you on this.  As you know, Josh has discussed this at length over the past few days, specifically our hesitations on this, which I’m happy to repeat include that given the military might of Russia, no amount of lethal aid that we would supply could bring the Ukrainians on par with that.  And then, also that our fundamental belief is this is something that should be resolved diplomatically.
Q    Also, in Yemen, rebels have taken over and dissolved parliament.  What’s the White House response to that?  And does that change our counterterrorism strategy there?
MR. SCHULTZ:  I’ll do both.  We have seen the reports that the Houthis held a public press conference in which they announced a new presidential council and their intention to dissolve the Yemeni parliament.  We are deeply concerned with this unilateral step.  We believe that this doesn't meet the standard set by the U.N. Special Representative for Yemen, in which our goal is to convene both parties to achieve consensus.
And in terms of our counterterrorism operations, as the President said a few days ago now, those remain uninterrupted.  And I don't have a change for you on that.
Q    And just one more time, can you just confirm that the United States is not investigating or trying to confirm whether or not this American female hostage was killed?  You haven’t said whether they're investigating or not.  I’m asking if they are.
MR. SCHULTZ:  Let me be clear:  We have not yet seen any indication to corroborate ISIL’s claim, but I’ll also be clear that members of the intelligence community are absolutely looking into this.
Q    Can I ask about Susan Rice’s event today?  I know she’s probably going to get into a lot of the details of the document itself.  But can you speak a little to how the document came together, who put it together, who wrote it, why you’re putting it out now, and what has changed in the five years since you last put out the National Security Strategy?
MR. SCHULTZ:  Thank you, Kevin.  As you point out, National Security Advisor Susan Rice is going to have a lot more to say on this, I believe maybe right now, at Brookings.  But I can tell you in terms of the process that was put together, it is the culmination of a very long process, an exhaustive process, a process that takes into account senior leadership of the departments and agencies.  And that includes Department of Defense, Department of State, our partners who work on trade issues, the intelligence community.  And this also includes high-level discussions with both Ambassador Rice and the President.
Q    Any thoughts on why you’ve decided to put it out at this point in time versus -- I know you said you’re going to start working on it in 2013, so why is it now that it’s coming out?
MR. SCHULTZ:  I think it’s important to just take a step back and realize that this is a document that provides strategic perspective to span several years, offering direction that has to go a little bit deeper than the daily headlines.  So therefore, it’s not unusual to take a substantial amount of time to put it together and then put it out.
Q    Was there any effort or any thinking that went into getting it out before you request new authorization from Congress for the operation against ISIL?  I mean, was there a thought that you should have a document that reflects the governing principle before you ask for specific authority to strike Iraq, Syria and maybe other places?
MR. SCHULTZ:  Well, again, on the AUMF, we believe that we already have the authority under the 2001 AUMF.  The President also believes that we present a much stronger front to the international community when both branches of government are speaking together.
In terms of the timing, I don’t believe it’s tied to the AUMF language, but I do think it’s tied to the budget.  Because, as you’ll see, the budget that we released earlier this week conforms to the National Security Strategy.   
END 

	1:16 P.M. EST
The White House
Office of the Press Secretary
Aboard Air Force One

	En Route Los Angeles, California
2:40 P.M. EDT
MR. SCHULTZ:  If everyone is ready, I have a quick announcement and then I’m happy to take your questions.
Prior to leaving the White House, the President this afternoon spoke with President Ashraf Ghani of Afghanistan by videoconference, along with Chief Executive Officer Dr. Abdullah Abdullah.  The President encouraged to accelerate Afghan progress towards forming an inclusive national unity government, and expressed his expectation that their visit to Washington later this month will demonstrate our mutual commitment to a strengthened U.S.-Afghan strategic partnership.
The leaders discussed the ongoing efforts of the Afghan National Security Forces to improve security in Afghanistan, and the importance of countering extremist threats from groups like al Qaeda.  The President commended President Ghani and Dr. Abdullah on their leadership in promoting an Afghan peace process to end the conflict in Afghanistan and their initiative to improve Afghanistan-Pakistan relations.
With that, I’m happy to take your questions.
Q    Eric, I wanted to ask you about the March 4th Secret Service episode that was making news.  Does the President still have confidence in Director Clancy?  And does it give him a second to pause about making a decision of hiring from within the Secret Service rather than outside, as recommended by an independent group?
MR. SCHULTZ:  Not at all, Jim.  When Director Clancy was asked to return to this agency, part of the reason the President selected him was because of his well-known leadership ability and his commitment to making sure that the agency that he spent so many years serving in was being run in the most effective manner and up to the highest standards. 
As Acting Director, he took several important and bold steps to address some of those challenges the agency has been facing over the last little while, and continues to make reforms as the permanent director.
Q    But does this meet those high standards?
MR. SCHULTZ:  Well, Mike, obviously the incident you’re referencing is under investigation by the independent Department of Homeland Security inspector general, so I’m not going to be in a position to comment on those allegations.  I will say that Director Clancy has shown a commitment to addressing the issues you’ve raised and that we’ve seen as part of the Secret Service over the last little while.  And that includes implementing structural reforms, but also paying close attention to the issues that have been plaguing this agency.
Q    Was the President briefed about this incident?  And did he express any concern about it?
MR. SCHULTZ:  The President was made aware earlier this week.  He was disappointed to hear the allegations.  But everyone at the White House supports the effort by Director Clancy to make sure that the Department of Homeland Security inspector general does a thorough and exhaustive review of this.
Q    Could you just clarify -- do you know what date he was informed?  And does he have the full confidence -- does Director Clancy have the full confidence of the President?
MR. SCHULTZ:  Yes.  And I don’t have the exact date.  It was earlier this week.
Q    Eric, Ferguson is back in the news again.  The last time we saw strikes hit that town, the administration got very closely involved.  You sent top officials down there.  Are we going to see that happen again now that Ferguson is going through another round of problems?
MR. SCHULTZ:  I think you saw before we took off, the President did put out a short statement.  The Attorney General also spoke to this earlier today.  And I can tell you that the President has been briefed on the terrible shooting of two officers that took place in Ferguson.  His thoughts and prayers are with the officers and their families.  We are comforted by the reports that the injuries are not life-threatening.  And we all wish the officers a full and speedy recovery.
As the President has repeatedly said, those who protect and serve our communities have an absolute right to go home safely to their families each night.  And as the President just commemorated in Selma this past week, peaceful protests can lead to important change; violence is utterly unacceptable.
Q    Are there any plans for any top aides or officials to go down to Ferguson?
MR. SCHULTZ:  I don’t have any travel announcements for you at this time.  I know the Attorney General both released a written statement and I believe addressed this a little while ago.
Q    Back to the Secret Service.  One of the issues apparently was that uniformed officers wanted to provide a field sobriety test, and a supervisor intervened and sent the Secret Service officials home.  What does that say about whether Director Clancy or anybody in the hierarchy of the Secret Service has addressed the culture that the President wanted to change?
MR. SCHULTZ:  Jim, it's critically important to us to protect the integrity around the independent investigation looking into this.  So I, for reasons I hope you can understand, am not going to be in a position to weigh in on any specifics of these allegations.  So we're going to wait for that investigation to be completed, and then we might be in a better position to weigh in on the specifics of the allegation.
Q    I remembered my question.  If I could just -- and it sort of follows on that, which is part of what the Secret Service was criticized so much about in some of the previous incidents was not being forthcoming, was not -- kind of waiting for stuff to dribble out and not telling the full truth.  Does the White House have concerns that once again this was a news organization breaking the news to both us and I guess maybe even to some of you guys that this had happened, and not being forthcoming when it happened last week and putting out a press release and saying, here it is, this happened, we're not happy about it?  I mean, that seems to be part of what Jim was talking about with the culture, and is that still the same?  I’m trying to get to the details of the incident.
MR. SCHULTZ:  Sure.  I will say again that the White House learned of this incident earlier this week.  So I don't want anyone to take away from your question that we learned about this from news reports.  That said, Director Clancy is in this position because the President -- because he does have the full confidence of the President to not only institute the structural reforms he believes are needed at the Secret Service, but also the cultural changes that both Director Clancy believes are necessary and the President has talked about.
Nobody has higher standards for the Secret Service than Director Clancy.  And it's important to the President and the Director to make sure that everyone throughout the agency observes them.
Q    You said the President was disappointed.  Was he or the White House generally disappointed that you didn’t hear about it before earlier this week, if it happened March 4th?
MR. SCHULTZ:  I don't have any reactions to give you in terms of our internal communications or conversations with senior staff.
Q    Is it fair to say that the White House is tired of having to deal with Secret Service crises every few months?
MR. SCHULTZ:  Jeff, I never get tired of your questions.
Q    That wasn’t my question.  (Laughter.)  But thank you. 
MR. SCHULTZ:  This is not a guy who is tired.
Q    Can you help us understand whether the President, in fact, learned about what had happened preemptively either before news reports or before they were about to be news reports?
MR. SCHULTZ:  It was absolutely before news reports.  I will try and see if we can unpack more of a tick-tock here, but that's not something we generally get into.
Q    Do you know where exactly the incident -- like how close to the White House it took place?  Was it right off 15th, exactly where it was?
MR. SCHULTZ:  I don't have those details.
Q    The President is going to visit the Phoenix VA facility on Friday.  And the VA still doesn’t have a permanent inspector general.  Do you know if there’s going to be any announcement on that or any movement?
MR. SCHULTZ:  Yes, thank you.  Tomorrow the President will travel to Phoenix, Arizona, to discuss veterans issues.  The President and Secretary of Veterans Affairs, Bob McDonald, will visit the Phoenix VA Medical Center.  During the course of this visit, the President will hear about progress made to improve the VA’s ability to serve veterans in a timely and effective manner, areas where more progress is needed and further steps that are planned.
I think we'll have more specifics about tomorrow’s visit for you tomorrow, or maybe later.  I don't know of any specific announcement regarding an inspector general.  I would say it's my understanding that the administration profoundly respects and admires the work of inspector generals across the administration and throughout various agencies, whether they are Senate-confirmed or not. 
Q    On that point, Eric, can you talk a little bit about concerns that not a lot of veterans are availing themselves of private health care centers, as provided for in the new law?
MR. SCHULTZ:  I think tomorrow the President is going to have an opportunity to meet with veterans, VA employees, veterans groups, and elected officials to hear about both the progress made to improve the VA’s ability to serve veterans in a timely and effective manner, but also areas where more progress is needed and further steps are planned. 
Q    Is that one of those areas where more progress is needed?
MR. SCHULTZ:  Without getting too specific on what conversations to preview for tomorrow, I think we’ll have more on this.  But I would say that everything is on the table in terms of this discussion.
Q    Eric, in the readout of your call that the President had with the leader of Afghanistan, did they discuss troop withdrawals or any potential plans to leave U.S. troops longer than previously said?
MR. SCHULTZ:  I don’t have any more specific detail to read out to you from that conversation, but I do know that that will be definitely a topic of their agenda for their visit in a few weeks.
Q    As for the visit to the Phoenix VA, he didn’t go in January and caught a fair amount of flak.  There were photos of the motorcade nearby and stuff.  Can you talk about why the decision to go now and why he had decided, in part, not to go in January?
MR. SCHULTZ:  Well, Margaret, you’ll hear directly from the President tomorrow on why he is visiting the Phoenix VA Medical Center.  But this is part of the President’s ongoing efforts to improve care for veterans.  Improving timely access to care for our veterans is an issue that the administration has been working on diligently.
Long after it fades from the headlines, this is something that a lot of people have been working on and that the President feels strongly about.  So even though it might not be generating front page news every day, this is something that the President has been focused on.  So I think you’ll hear more about his visit and the impetus for it tomorrow.
Q    Eric, there’s a bill -- a trafficking bill -- stuck in the Senate right now.  It's a bipartisan bill that there’s an issue over abortion language in it.  If that language remains in it, would the President veto it?  And what does the President believe should be done with the bill right now?
MR. SCHULTZ:  Jim, I saw some public reports on this, that there’s a lot of moving parts and a lot of conversations around that bill in both parties.  So I'm going to not weigh in at this point. 
Q    Do you want a Hillary email question?  (Laughter.)
MR. SCHULTZ:  Have a good flight.
Q    No, No.  We’re not quite done. 
MR. SCHULTZ:  Okay, okay.  Anything else?
Q    Sorry, I thought you were just joking.  So there is some legislation by Chuck Grassley that would prevent beneficiaries of the President’s executive actions from receiving certain benefits, and I'm just wondering if the administration has any initial reaction.
MR. SCHULTZ:  I don’t have a particular direct comment for you on that piece of legislation.  What I can tell you is that under the President’s executive actions, deferred action recipients can apply for a Social Security number, join the legal workforce, pay taxes, and come out of the shadows and be held accountable.  But for more details on what you’re asking about, I’d refer you to the IRS. 
Q    Can I ask you one more question?  We have the President’s schedule, or at least part of the President’s schedule for tonight and for tomorrow, and I just wanted to ask, does he have any plans while he is at his hotel or somewhere else in Los Angeles to meet with any other actors, celebrities, movie executives, or anyone else that we might be interested in, in an event that’s not currently on the schedule?
MR. SCHULTZ:  Am I not good enough?  You have the latest version of the President’s public schedule.  If anything on that changes, I will let you know. 
Q    Eric, I’ll try one Hillary question.  Sorry.  Does the President have any concern about the fact that the field of Democrats who could be running to be his successor is pretty much narrowed down to one person, and that that person is a little weakened by this email issue?
MR. SCHULTZ:  Jeff, I assume there will be ample opportunity over the next 18 months to weigh in on the 2016 presidential race.  This is not going to be one of those times. 
Q    All right.  I'm not even going to follow up. 
MR. SCHULTZ:  Thank you all.  Have a good flight.
END

	2:54 P.M. EDT
